Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 

Copyright 1984 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 

1984, Vol. 10, No. 5, 704-712 

## Auditory Perception of Breaking and Bouncing Events: A Case Study in Ecological Acoustics William H. Warren, Jr. Robert R. Verbrugge University of Connecticut University of Connecticut and Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, Connecticut 

The mechanical events of bouncing and breaking are acoustically specified by single versus multiple damped quasi-periodic pulse patterns, with an initial noise burst in the case of breaking. Subjects show high accuracy in categorizing natural tokens of bouncing and breaking glass as well as tokens constructed by adjusting only the temporal patterns of components, leaving their spectral properties constant. Differences in average spectral frequency are, therefore, not necessary for perceiving this contrast, though differences in spectral consistency over successive pulses may be important. Initial noise corresponding to glass rupture appears unnecessary to categorize breaking and bouncing. The data indicate that higher order temporal properties of the acoustic signal provide information for the auditory perception of these events. 

Research in auditory perception has tended actions (Fletcher, 1934; Helmholtz, 1863/ to emphasize the detection and processing of 1954; Plomp, 1964; see Green, 1976). sound elements with quasi-stable spectral The perceptual role of time-varying propstructure, such as tones, formants, and bursts erties of sound has received less attention. of noise. In the spectral domain, these eleExceptions to this are found in research on ments are distinguished by frequency peak amplitude and frequency modulation, inor range, bandwidth, and amplitude. In the cluding auditory phenomena such as beats, temporal domain, acoustic analysis has often periodicity pitch, and frequency glides. In focused on the durations of sound elements, general, research on time-varying properties the intervals and phase relations between has been most common in the study of them, and the influence of these on pitch and classes of natural events, such as human loudness perception, temporal acuity, maskspeech, music, and animal communication, ing, and localization. The auditory system where an analysis of sound into quasi-stable has often been approached as an analyzer of elements is often problematic. In the case of essentially time-constant functions of frespeech, for example, many phonemic conquency, amplitude, and duration, on the astrasts can be defined by differences in the sumption that complex auditory percepts are direction and rate of change of major speech compositions over sound elements having resonances (see Liberman, Cooper, Shankthose properties, with certain temporal inter_weiler, & Studdert-Kennedy, 1967; Liberman, Delattre, Gerstman, & Cooper, 1956). Some research on the perception of music has also This research was supported by Grant HD-01994 from demonstrated the perceptual significance of the National Institute for Child Health and Human time-varying properties. Identification of muDevelopment,| Q by Biomedicalins Laboratories, Rescarchan Support Grant10n sical‘ instruments, for example, is strongly Science Foundation graduate fellowship to the first author influenced by the temporal structure of tranThe authors wish to thank Michael Studdert-Kennedy, sients that accompany tone onsets (Luce & Michael Turvey, Robert Shaw, and Ignatius Mattingly for Clark, 1967; Saldanha & Corso, 1964). In their comments on an earlier draft, particular, the relative onset timing and the H.Requests for reprints should be addressed to William rates of amplitude change of upper harmonics Warren, Jr, who is now at the Walter S. Hunter have been found to be critical properties of Laboratory of Psychology, Brown University, Providence, . . pe . Rhode Island 02912. Robert R. Verbrugge is now at Bel! attack transients that permit distinctions Laboratories, Holmdel, New Jersey. among instrument families (Grey, 1977; Grey 

704 

ECOLOGICAL ACOUSTICS 

705 

& Gordon, 1978). Animal vocalizations are similarly rich in time-varying properties (such as rhythmic pulsing, frequency modulation, and amplitude modulation), and many of these properties have been shown to be critical for distinguishing the species, sex, location, and motivational state of the producer (e.g., Brown, Beecher, Moody, & Stebbins, 1978; Konishi, 1978; Peterson, Beecher, Zoloth, Moody, & Stebbins, 1978). 

Jenkins, 1984). Such casual observations were corroborated in experiments by VanDerveer (1979a, 1979b). She presented 30 recorded items of natural sound in a[free][identification] task and found that many events such as clapping, footsteps, jingling keys, and tearing paper were identified with greater than 95% accuracy. Subjects tended to respond by naming a mechanical event that produced the sound and reported their experiences: in terms of sensory qualities only when source recognition was not possible. VanDerveer (1979a) also found that confusion errors in identification tasks and clustering in sorting tasks tended to show the grouping of events by common temporal patterns. For example, hammering was confused with walking, and the scratching of fingernails was confused with filing, but hammering and walking were not confused with the latter two events. 

It is noteworthy that in each of these areas terms of sensory qualities only when source of research on natural events, the discovery recognition was not possible. VanDerveer or explanation of perceptually significant, (1979a) also found that confusion errors in time-varying acoustic properties has been identification tasks and clustering in sorting motivated by an analysis of the time-varying tasks tended to show the grouping of events behavior of the sound source. In the case of by common temporal patterns. For example, speech, for example, an analysis of speech hammering was confused with walking, and production has been an integral part of the the scratching of fingernails was confused search for the acoustic basis for speech perwith filing, but hammering and walking were ception (e.g., Fant, 1960; Fowler, 1977; Fowler, not confused with the latter two events. Rubin, Remez, & Turvey, 1980; Liberman et These results support the general claim al., 1967; Verbrugge, Rakerd, Fitch, Tuller, that sound sound in isolation permits accurate iden& Fowler, in press), It is also worth noting tification of classes classes of sound-producing events that researchers in these areas have often when the temporal structure of the the sound is found it useful to characterize acoustic inforspecific to the mechanical activity of the mation in terms of higher order structure in source (Gibson, 1966; Schubert, 1974). If sound—that is, in terms of functions over higher order information is found to be spethe variables of frequency, amplitude, and _ cific to events, whereas values of lower lower order duration. Given the time-varying behavior of variables per se are not, then it may be more the sound sources involved, it is not surprising fruitful to view the auditory system as being that many of these functions are time-dependesigned for the perception of source events dent, defining rates of change and styles of via higher order acoustic functions, rather change in lower order acoustic variables (for than for the detection of quasi-stable sound example, the direction, rate, and change in elements. Schubert (1974) put this succinctly rate of formant frequency transitions). Finally, in his source identification principle for authe example of systems capable of measuring ditory perception: “Identification of sound higher order physical properties, such as area, sources, and the behavior of those those sources, is . without prior measurement of more elementhe primary task of the [auditory] system” tary properties, such as length (Runeson, (p. 126). , 1977), has encouraged some researchers to This general perspective on auditory perbelieve that, analogously, higher order acoustic ception may be called ecological acoustics, structure may be directly detectable. by analogy to the ecological optics advocated 

These results support the general claim that sound sound in isolation permits accurate identification of classes classes of sound-producing events when the temporal structure of the the sound is specific to the mechanical activity of the source (Gibson, 1966; Schubert, 1974). If higher order information is found to be specific to events, whereas values of lower lower order variables per se are not, then it may be more fruitful to view the auditory system as being designed for the perception of source events via higher order acoustic functions, rather than for the detection of quasi-stable sound elements. Schubert (1974) put this succinctly in his source identification principle for auditory perception: “Identification of sound sources, and the behavior of those those sources, is the primary task of the [auditory] system” (p. 126). , 

This general perspective on auditory perception may be called ecological acoustics, by analogy to the ecological optics advocated by Gibson (1961, 1966, 1979) as an an approach to vision. The ecological approach combines physical analysis of the source event, the identification of higher order acoustic properties specific to that event, and empirical tests of the listener’s ability. to detect such information, in an attempt to avoid the introduction of ad hoc processing principles to account for perception (Shaw, Turvey, & Mace, 1981). In any natural event, identifiable objects participate in identifiable transfor- 

The role of time-varying properties in the by Gibson (1961, 1966, 1979) as an an approach perception of other familiar events in the to vision. The ecological approach combines human environment is largely unknown. Our a physical analysis of the source event, the goal in this article is to demonstrate that identification of higher order acoustic prophigher order temporal structure can be imerties specific to that event, and empirical portant for perceiving such events. tests of the listener’s ability. to detect such 

It is apparent from everyday experience that listeners can detect significant aspects of the environment by ear, from a knock at the door to the condition of an automobile engine and the gait of an approaching friend (seée 

706 

WILLIAM H. WARREN, JR., AND ROBERT R. VERBRUGGE 

**==> picture [296 x 26] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
(a) (b)<br>” Figure 1, Caricatures of mechanical events: Panel a, bouncing; Panel b, breaking.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [2 x 2] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
;<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


mations or styles of change. The information that specifies the kind of object and its properties under change is known as the structural invariant of an event; reciprocally, the information that specifies the style of change itself is known as the transformational invariant. These invariants may be described mathematically in terms of properties that remain constant and those that vary systematically under change (Mark, Todd, & Shaw, 1981; Pittenger & Shaw, 1975; Shaw, McIntyre, & Mace, 1974; Warren & Shaw, 1984). 

The present research explores the acoustic, consequences of dropping a glass object and its subsequent bouncing or breaking. Bouncing and breaking are two distinct styles of change that may be applied to a variety of objects. By acoustic and perceptual studies of these events, we hope to identify the transformational invariants specific to the two styles of change and sufficient to convey them to a listener. (Structural invariants specifying individual properties of the objects such as size, shape, and material will not be discussed here.) 

Consider first the mechanical action of a bottle bouncing on a hard surface (see Figure 1, Panel a). Each collision consists of an initial impact that briefly sets the bottle into vibration at a set of frequencies determined by its size, shape, and material composition. This is reflected in the acoustic signal as an initial burst. of noise followed by spectral energy concentrated at a particular set of 

overtone frequencies. Over a series of bounces, the collisions between object and ground occur with declining impact force and decreasing (“damped”) period, although some irregularities in the pattern may occur because of the asymmetry of the bottle. The spectral components are similar across bounces, with relative overtones varying slightly because of the varying orientations of the bottle at impact. (The spectrum within each pulse is quasi-stable and is conventionally described in terms of spectral peaks in a cross section of the signal.) These acoustic consequences may be described as a single damped quasiperiodic pulse train in which the pulses share a similar cross-sectional spectrum (Figure 2, Panel a). We suggest that this single pulse train constitutes a transformational invariant of temporal patterning for the bouncing style of change. 

Turning to the mechanical action of breaking (Figure 1, Panel b), we see that a catastrophic rupture occurs upon impact. Assuming an idealized case, the resulting pieces then continue to bounce without further breakage, each with its own independent col_lision pattern. The acoustic consequences appear as an initial rupture burst dissolving into overlapping multiple damped quasi-periodic pulse trains, each train having a different cross-sectional spectrum and damping characteristic (Figure 2, Panel b). We propose that a compound signal, consisting of a noise burst followed by such multiple pulse trains, 

ECOLOGICAL ACOUSTICS 

707 

— temporal correspondences among their colli7 idea sion patterns. In Experiment 1 we establish o ' that listeners can categorize natural cases of P i hop breaking and bouncing with high accuracy. } woe ® In Experiment 2, we examine performance ‘ bd pee be te 4 Pr r (a) with constructed cases that include an initial noise burst and compare it with the results aSleeFI | | het| | | thefor naturalcontributionsound.ofIn the Experimentburst by removing3 we assessit 1 0 rdo a er breaking.from both natural and constructed cases of (oe= ’ ; £7 7 aaa? Experiment |: Natural Tokens . "ul Bani 5 The first experiment investigated whether 7, i i. natural sound provides sufficient acoustic in4 ee |e (pb) formation for listeners to categorize the events 3 adign ed| a \ €cla . of breaking and bouncing. 2h | ner gear F ae aHe ao _ Method . Subjects. Fifteen graduate and undergraduate students Figure 2. Spectrograms of natural tokens: Panel a, Participated in the experiment for payment or course bouncing (BNC1); Panel b, breaking (BRK). ee. AEG yj Pan ing ( } Materials. Natural recordings were made of three glass objects dropping onto a concrete floor covered by linoleum tile in a sound-attenuated room. The sound of constitutes a transformational invariant for each object was recorded with a Crown a bn the breaking style of change. when the object was dropped from a 1-ft (0.305 m) — fr 8 oe " " . ft 1 wat height (bouncing) and when it was dropped from a 2- to side Irom these aspects OF temporal pat5. (9.61-1.525 m) height (breaking). This procedure terning and initial noise, certain crude spectral yielded three tokens of bouncing and three tokens of differences between breaking and bouncing breaking. The objects used and the durations of the can be observed by comparing spectrograms ey: fone oh gy igh — are Be . . ° ollows: (a) 32-0z (0. jar: = 1,6 **0** ms, or reebreaking casesevents (Figureare——distri uted the overtonesacross a collisions;BNC? = 1,600BRK1ms,= 1,200[5 collisions; ms. (b) 64-ozBRK2 (1.892= 5501) bottle:ms. (c) wider range of frequencies than are those of _ 1-liter bottle: BNC3 = 1,300 ms, 17 collisions; BRK3 = bouncing events. Second, the overtones of 700 ms. The recordings were digitized ata 20-kHz breaking are denser in the frequency domain. sampling rate using the Pulse Code Modulation (PCM) Bothoth ofth rti b a h system at Haskins Laboratories. A test tape was then oF these prope Mes can be tracec to t € recorded, containing 20 trials of each natural token in contrast between a single object in vibration randomized order for a total of 120 test trials. A pause and a number of disparate objects simultaof 3s occurred between trials, and a pause of 10s neously in vibration. occurred after every six trials. The following. sy ‘aiabiania. ile the hypothto Procedure.the tape binaurallySubjects,throughrun in groupsheadph **o** fnes. 2 toThey5, listenedwere esis that temporal patterning alone, without told that they would be hearing recordings of objects differences in quasi-stable spectral properties, that had either bounced or broken after being dropped provides effective information for listeners to but were told nothing about the nature of the objects categorize breaking and bouncing styles of involved. Their three-choice task was to categorize each h S tral diff cin | event as a case of breaking or bouncing, with a don’t change. ( pectra. GI erences May provide IM- — know option, by placing a check in the appropriate portant information about the nature and column on an answer sheet. To minimize the possibility material of the objects involved.) By superthat they would choose one of the two event categories imposingDIECES.: ofrecordingsbroken glass,of pulsesartificial“pefrom individualcases of ifinstructednottheymake = upto theirusethethe minds, —don’tifa theyknow couldcategorynot vaiftellthey whatcouldwerethe breaking and bouncing can be constructed event was, or if it sounded like some other type of event. from a common set of pulses by varying the They were specifically instructed to ignore the nature of 

708 WILLIAM H. WARREN, JR., AND ROBERT R. VERBRUGGE 

the object involved and attend to “what’s happening to adjusted so that their onsets matched the same pulse it.” Subjects received no practice trials or feedback. There _ pattern, they were superimposed by summing the instanwas a short break after 60 trials, and a test session lasted taneous amplitudes of the digitized recordings. The result about 20 min. was a combined pulse pattern with synchronized onsets for all bounces, preserving the invariant of a single Results . . damped quasi-periodic pulse train to model bouncing and Discussion (Figure 4, Panel a), Overall performance on natural bouncing An artificial breaking token was constructed by readtok 99.3% “ ine” iud: justing the recordings of the same four pieces to match OKENS Was 77.5% correct (“bouncing” judgfour different temporal patterns (Figure 3, Panel b). As ments), and on breaking tokens was 98.5% a[first][approximation,][these][master][ patterns][were][ borrowed] correct (‘‘breaking” judgments). Don’t know from measurements of four different bouncing bottles, responses accounted for 0.2% of all answers because the likely patterns of individual pieces of glass on : : in the course of natural breaking were unknown. These bouncing tokens and 0.7% on breaking four patterns were initiated simultaneously, preceded by tokens. Experiment 1 demonstrates that suf59 ms of noise burst taken from the original rupture ficient information exists in the acoustic signal that produced the four pieces of glass. The result after to permit unpracticed listeners to categorize superimposing these four independent temporal series the natural events of bouncing and breaking was a combined pattern with asynchronous pulse onsets, att leastleast withinwithin thethe limilimits off thethe three-choiceth hoi ” preservingquasi-periodicthe pulsetemporaltrainsinvariantto modelofbreakingmultiple(Figuredamped4, task. Panel b). Note that the variables of temporal patterning This successful categorization could be and initial noise were confounded in this experiment. To based on various temporal and spectral properties of the signal, as discussed in the introduction. Although the bouncing tokens were 1 | | | | | | all of longer duration than were the breaking tokens, duration is a function of object elasticity and height of drop and does not provide 2 | | [ | | | reliable information specific to a style of (a) durationchange. Bothwere spectralcontrolledpropertiesin Experimentand token2 to 9 l ] | ] TT isolate the effect of temporal patterning. Experiment, 2: Constructed Tokens 4 | | | | | | In Experiment 2 we attempted to model the time-varying information contained in natural recordings by using constructed cases of bouncing and breaking, eliminating average spectral differences between the two. sis ] I Method Subjects. Fifteen graduate and undergraduate students 2 a | | | il participatedcredit. None inof themthe experimenthad participatedfor paymentin Experimentor course1. “ ( b ) breM **a** kingterials.were Tokensconstructedintendedby tothemodelfollowingbouncingmethod.and 3 iHS | | | | | Initially, individual recordings were made of four major pieces of glass from a broken bottle as each piece was sets dropped and bounced separately from a low height. These 4 | | | | | | recordings were combined in two ways using the PCM “ system. . To construct an artificial bouncing token, the temporal time ——» pattern of the recording of each piece was adjusted to match a single master periodicity arbitrarily borrowed Figure 3. Schematic diagrams of constructed tokens, from a recording of a natural bouncing bottle (Figure 3, | combining four component pulse trains; Panel a, bouncPanel a). This was accomplished by inserting silence ing, with synchronous pulse onsets; Panel b, breaking, between the bounce pulses in recordings of the individual with initial noise burst and asynchronous pulse onsets. pieces. After the recordings of all four pieces had been (Each pulse train has unique spectral properties.) 

709 

## ECOLOGICAL ACOUSTICS 

**==> picture [396 x 579] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
the experimenters’ ears the burst improved the quality of |Table |<br>apparent breakage, but this assumption was later tested Percentage of Trials in Which Constructed<br>in Experiment 3. Tokens of Bouncing and Breaking Were<br>Three constructed cases of bouncing and three corre- Categorized as Such (Experiment 2)<br>sponding cases of breaking were produced by this method, § ——_—_— —<— <_< — — — — —<— ——— — — —— —< —  — ——_____—__<br>each pair constructed from a unique set of recordings of Token Bouncing Breaking<br>original pieces and matched to a unique set of master©§_<br>periodicities, To help assure the generality of the method, 1<br>the first three pairs constructed in this manner were used % 93.7 89.0<br>in the experiment. The original objects, and the durations M 18.7 17.8<br>of the bouncing or synchronous (SYN) and breaking or SD 1.7 2.9<br>asynchronous (ASYN) tokens constructed from their<br>pieces, were as follows: (a) 32-0z (0.946 1) jar: SYN1 = 2<br>1,000 ms, 8 collisions; ASYN1 = 950 ms. (b) 32-oz % 94.3 713<br>(0.946 1) jar: SYN2 = 1,400 ms, 13 collisions; ASYN2 = M 18.9 14.3<br>650 ms. (c) 64-0z (1.892 1) bottle: SYN3 = 920 ms, 9 SD 2.0 4.3<br>collisions; ASYN3 = 600 ms.<br>Hence, the only differences between constructed 3 3<br>bouncing and breaking tokens were in the temporal eA i ‘<br>registration of pulse onsets and the presence (or absence) SD 37 19.<br>of initial noise. The range and distribution of spectral : 0.3<br>frequencies, averaged over time, were comparable in the Overall % 90.7 86.7<br>two cases. Tokens SYN1, SYN3, and ASYN1 had similar ©©§ ————— AA ES<br>durations of 920 to 1,000 ms, and thus if subjects based Aor Scores are based on 20 trials per subject per cell,<br>categorization on this factor, large errors should occur yy = 15,<br>with these tokens.<br>There were certain problems with the constructed<br>cases. The process of superimposing pulse patterns also that sounded more like metal than like glass material<br>summed tape hiss and hum so that background noise (SYNI and SYN2). Nevertheless, the temporal invariant<br>was increased. Moreover, using recordings of only four was preserved. Finally, the use of only four pieces of<br>large pieces of glass concentrated more spectral energy glass to model breaking, the assumption that their peri-<br>in the lower frequency ranges as compared to natural odicities were akin to those of whole bouncing bottles,<br>tokens (cf. Figures 2 and 4), and constructing the sound and the assumption of no further breakage after the<br>of a single bouncing object by combining the spectral initial catastrophe, were all rather arbitrary idealizations.<br>components of these four pieces produced two tokens Nevertheless, if temporal patterning constitutes sufficient<br>information for breaking and bouncing, subjects should<br>be able to make reliable judgments of these tokens.<br>7 err Procedure. The procedure was the same as that in<br>’ Experiment |. Instructions to the subjects were the same,<br>Fee<br>; including the instruction to ignore object properties and<br>5 ‘ ' concentrate on the style of change.<br>SF a ail called Le HOS |<br>sk , ad 1 , Results and Discussion<br>q2 7 = Hi The results for each constructed token<br>mule rte: Ai'le fae fia appear in Table | and are consistent with the<br>~<br>3 ¢ pothesis.predictionsBouncingof the judgmentstemporal onpatterningsynchronoushy-<br>o tokens averaged 90.7%, and breaking judg-<br>c ments on asynchronous tokens averaged<br>c Eien 86.7% (these judgments being treated as cor-<br>oF | iA ' rect). Don’t know answers accounted for 0.1%<br>Sk fe The. Met of all responses on bouncing tokens and 1.3%<br>| a ie ee (bp) 02 breaking tokens. Considering the artificial<br>Md ORG ute! nature of the constructed cases and the ideal-<br>As, @ cis bo izations involved, this performance may be<br>iL ere ical ie considered quite high.<br>r a siatiaimanias , —_—— The absence of any large systematic dec-<br>rement for tokens SYN1, SYN3, and ASYNI1<br>Figure 4. Spectrograms of constructed tokens: Panel a, indicates that subjects were not relying on<br>bouncing (SYN1); Panel b, breaking (ASYN1). simple duration in making their judgments.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


710 

WILLIAM H. WARREN, JR., AND ROBERT R. VERBRUGGE 

Some departures from the general pattern _ in the two previous experiments. For breaking cases, the markedly lower performance (71.3%), a higher for that experiment. The natural breaking tokens from intersubject standard deviation, and a relaExperiment | were modified by removing the naturally tively high rate of don’t know responses (4.0%). occurring burst. Because there was no distinct boundary These differences were primarily due to the in the natural waveform between the rupture burst and low performance of 5 subjects who averaged the subsequent collision pulses, the natural tokens were 44% hi k h h fi edited by removing noise identifiable on an oscillogram of the© on otherthis token,10 averagedwhereas the85%.performanceIt may be resultedang by listening forin the removal the absence ofof the initiala burst.80 ms This techniquefrom BRK1, noted that the summed background noise 50 ms from BRK2, and 60 ms from BRK3. In sum, was greater in ASYN2 than in the other two mere were thee oxen or bouncing an ee tokens or breaking cases. The fact that overall perfor- bean (witonditions. noise) in both the natural an mance in this case was well above chance procedure. The natural and constructed conditions indicates that even the poorest token conwere run using a between-group design, with 15 subjects tained usable information. It is not surprising in each group. The procedure and instructions were the that some tokens of constructed breaking are order a before, we cach group receiving 120 randomly more convincing than others, because there O°"°* 11S 7 Blocks oF six. are certainly some natural instances that are Results and Discussion more compelling than others. The differences The results for each token appear in Table among tokens may involve both the spectral > With natural cases, the overall performance distinctiveness of the component pieces Of was 99.9% judgments of bouncing with glass and their degree of asynchrony. bouncin F In : g tokens and 96.0% judgments of general, performance with constructed breaking with breaking tokens; with the contokens was well above the chance level, similar gtructed cases it was 93.0% for bouncing and r. tat found for natural tokens ini eperiment 86.7% for breaking. These results were nearly only : identical to those of Experiment 1 with natcases,idea aboutdespite10%the lowersummatiotha **n** ofwithnoise,naturalthe strucrai **t** edokenstoke a **n** s.d toDon't Experimentknow answers2 with conac **-** aon ofconstruction, and the metallic counted for 0.0% of all responses on natural sound of tokens SYN1 and SYN2. The data bouncing tokens, 1.0% on natural breaking permit us to conclude that temporal patterntokens, 2.0% on constructed bouncing tokens, fon with oer noise provides sufficient a and 4.0% on constructed breaking tokens. att boun for isteners to categorize breaking Hence, removal of initial noise from and bouncing events. breaking tokens does not reduce perceptual a . 3: Initial Noi performance. This finding for the natural erin : Initial Noise cases indicates that the burst is not necessary Specific to Rupturing for categorization of the two events. The To isolate the variable of single versus Same finding with constructed cases demonmultiple pulses and to assess the importance _Strates that variation in the temporal patternof the initial noise burst, the first two exper18 Of pulse onsets is alone sufficient to iments were repeated with initial noise rePermit the categorization of breaking and moved from both natural and constructed bouncing. . . cases of breaking. Experiment 3 was conThese results are consistent with the hyducted to determine whether initial noise, in Pothesis that multiple quasi-periodic pulse addition to the pulse patterns, was necessary ‘tains provide sufficient information for: lisfor subjects to categorize breaking and teners to categorize breaking. Further work bouncing. remains to be done to determine whether the initial noise is necessary for identifying Method breakagean thoseunderin theconditionspresent experiment.less constrained Subjects. Thirty graduate and undergraduate students P P participated in the experiment for payment. None had General Discussion . participated in the previous experiments. . . Materials. Both natural and constructed tokens were In the preceding experiments we have atprepared. Bouncing tokens were the same as those used tempted to determine whether higher order, 

ECOLOGICAL ACOUSTICS 

711 

Table 2 ing and bouncing glass, as evidenced by the Percentage of Trials in Which Natural and metallic sound of bouncing tokens SYN! and Constructed Tokens ofBreaking and Bouncing SYN2 and the use of only four component Nere Categorized * Such, Without Initial pieces to construct breaking tokens, Successful Noise (Experiment 3) simulation would require still more complex _OONatural Constructed spectralmanipulations ofinformation acousticfor structure,the material includingcomToken Bouncing Breaking Bouncing Breaking position of the object, predicated on findings \ such as those reported here. % 99.7 93.7 94.0 83.7 The amplitude and periodicity requireM 19.9 18.7 18.8 16.7 ments of the temporal patterns in bouncing SD 0.3 2.4 2.2 2.9 events were considered in two simple dem2 onstrations worth mentioning here. Iterating % 99.7 97.7 97.3 16.7 a recording of one bounce pulse to match M 19.9 19.5 19.5 15.3. the timing of a natural bouncing sequence SD 0.3 1.6 0.9 4.1 produced a clear bouncing event, although 3 the usual declining amplitude gradient was % 100.0 96.7 87.7 99.7 absent. However, adjusting the pulse pattern Oo 200 03 17.5 19.9 to create equal 100-ms intervals between . ° 27 0.3 pulse onsets, thereby eliminating the damping Overall % 99.8 96.0 93.0 86.7 of the periodic pattern, destroyed the effect N=Note.15Scoresin thearenaturalbased andon constructed20 trials: conditionsper : eetL, amplitudeof perceived. gradient.bouncing,‘ Theeven rapid. with staccatoa declining sound was like that produced by a machine, such as a jackhammer. A damped series of collitime-varying properties constitute effective sions, constrained by gravity and the imperfect acoustic information for the events of bouncelasticity of the system, appears necessary to ing and breaking. The results show that certhe information for bouncing, as originally tain damped periodic patterns provide suffihypothesized. Experiments are in progress to cient information for listeners to categorize assess the efficacy of period damping as inthe two events, without significant differences formation for elasticity or “‘bounciness” itself. in average spectral properties and without an Further research is needed to determine initial noise burst. The results provide evithe acoustic patterns necessary to specify dence that listeners can utilize these transforsingle and multiple pulse trains. As suggested mational invariants for the auditory percepin the original hypotheses, distinct spectral tion of breaking and bouncing events. Of properties for each asynchronous pulse train course, the number of possible acoustic propin a breaking token may be required to erties, although bounded, is in principle insegregate the pulse trains and convey the definitely large. Only reasonable candidates existence of separate pieces of glass (although from:our analysis were experimentally mathe superimposition of synchronous pulse nipulated, and other hypotheses remain open trains with different frequency spectra did to test. not yield the perception of separate pieces in The strength of the results is mitigated by the bouncing tokens). Reciprocally, it may be the limitations of the three-choice categorinecessary for the successive pulses of a zation task. By definition, the task requires bouncing token to be spectrally similar in foreknowledge of the event classes and does order to convey the unity of the pulse train not exclude the possibility that a token may and to cohere as the bouncing of a single be categorized as breaking because it sounds object. ; something /ike that event, even though it The present experiments exemplify an ecowould not uniquely convey breaking outside logical approach to auditory perception, the restricted conditions of the experiment. seeking to identify higher order acoustic inAlthough a free identification task might test formation for environmental events. The this possibility, the tokens. were not conacoustic consequences of two distinct types structed to fully simulate real events of breakof mechanical events were analyzed for their 

- 712 WILLIAM H. WARREN, JR., AND ROBERT R. VERBRUGGE temporaltime-varvi5 te badand P eeerspectral tLi structure,Sufficient: andto conveysome Mace,ceiving:yourW.head’s M977).Ask insidenot what’s Jamesof. In insideR.Gibson'sE. yourShawstrategy &head,J. Bransfordbutfor perwhat aspec $0 € even S10 a Is ener were em(Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and knowing: Toward an pirically determined. Such work is prelimiecological psychology (pp. 43-65). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlnary to modeling auditory mechanisms ca- _ baum. pableformationalof. detectinginvariants: . these(seestructuralMace, and1977).transMark,differentperceptionreS.styles Todd,of growth:of changeoinkA &aregeometricalShaw,distinguished. R analysisE. (1981).Journalof phehow of References formance,Experimental7, 355-368. Psychology: Human Perception and Per- 

- Brown, . Petersen, M. R., Beecher, M. D., Zoloth, S. R., Moody, W. C. H., Beecher, M. D., Moody, D. B., & Stebbins, D. B., & Stebbins, W. C. (1978). Neural lateralization C. (1978). Localization of primate calls by Old of species-specific vocalizations by Japanese macaques 

- World monkeys. Science, 201, 753-754. ; (Macaca fuscata). Science, 202, 324-327. 

- Fant, G. (1960). Acoustic theory of speech production. Pittenger, J. B., & Shaw, R. E. (1975). Aging faces as Fletcher,The Hague:H. (1934).Mouton.Loudness, pitch,, and the timbre/ of rv **i** scal-elgid sh **a** sticpe p **e** rception.vents: ImplicationsJournal o **f** orExperimental a theory of nonPsy **-** ~ musical tones and their relation to the intensity, the chology: Human Perception and Performance, 1, 374frequency, and the overtone structure. Journal of the 382. 

- Fowler, AcousticalDissertation Abstracts©. A. aie . tamerdimingInternational,controlica, 6, 59-69.in speech38, 3927B.production.oducti(UniPlomp,Journal1636. R.off(1964).the AcousticalThe ear Society; as vaofoffrequencyAmerica, 36,analyzer.1628versity Microfilms No. 7731074) Runeson, S. (1977). On the possibility of “smart” per- 

- Fowler, C, A., Rubin, P., Remez, R. E., & Turvey, M. T. ceptual mechanisms. Scandinavian Journal of Psy(1980). Implications for speech production of a general chology, 18, 172~179. theory of action. In B. Butterworth (Ed.), Language Saldanha, E. L., & Corso, J. F. (1964). Timbre cues and production. Speech and talk (Vol. 1, 373-420). New the identification of musical instruments, Journal of York: Academic Press, 7 the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, 36, 2021-2026. 

- Gibson, J. J. (1961). Ecological optics. Vision Research, Schubert, E. D. (1974). The role of auditory perception dL 253-262. . in language processing. In D, D, Duane & M. B. 

- Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual Rawson (Eds.), Reading, perception, and language (pp. systems. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 97-130), Baltimore: York Press. 

- Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual Shaw, R. E., McIntyre, M., & Mace, W. M. (1974). The perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. = role of symmetry in event perception. In R. B, MacLeod 

- Green,Grey,NJ: Erlbaum.D. M,(1976), An introductioni , to hearing. Hillsdale,. James& H. L.J. PickGibson(Eds.),(pp. Perception:276-310). Ithaca:EssaysCornellin honorUni-of of J. M. (1977). Multidimensional perceptual scaling versity Press, of musical timbres. Journal of the Acoustical Society Shaw, R. E., Turvey, M. T., & Mace, W. M. (1981). America, 61, 1270-1277. Ecological psychology: The consequence of a commit- 

- Grey, J. M., & Gordon, J. W. (1978). Perceptual effects ment to realism. In W. Weimer & D. Palermo (Eds.), of spectral modifications on musical timbres. Journal Cognition and the symbolic processes (Vol. 2, pp. 159~ of the Acoustical Society ofAmerica, 63, 1493-1500. 226). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

- Jenkins, J. J. (1984), Acoustic information for places, VanDerveer, N, J. (1979a, June), Acoustic information objects, and events. In W. H. Warren & R. E. Shaw for event perception. Paper presented at the Celebration (Eds.), Persistence and change: Proceedings of the first in Honor of Eleanor J, Gibson, Cornell University, international conference on event perception (pp. 115Ithaca, NY. 

- Helmholtz,138). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. ; VanDerveer, N. J. (1979b, June). Confusion errors in tone H. L. F. von (1954). On the sensations of identification of environmental sounds. Paper presented New as a physiological basis for the theory of music. _at the Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America, York: Dover. (Original work published 1863) Cambridge, MA. 

- Konishi,recognition.M. (1978). Ethological aspectsof auditory pattern Verbrugge, R. R., Rakerd, B., Fitch, H., Tuller, B., & (Eds.), In R. Held, H. Leibowitz, & H. L. Teuber Fowler, C. A. (in press), Perception of speech events: 

- _tion (pp. Handbook289-309). ofNs **e** nsoryw York: physioloSprin **g** y,er-Verlag.Vol. 8: PercepAn(Eds.), ecologicalEvent approach.perception:In R.An E.ecological Shaw & W.perspective. M. Mace 

- Liberman, A. M., Cooper, F. S., Shankweiler, D, P., & Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, Studdert-Kennedy, M. (1967). Perception of the speech Warren, W. H., & Shaw, R. E. (1984), Events and 

- code. Psychological Review, 74, 431-461. encounters as units of analysis for ecological psychology. 

- Tberman, A. M., Delattre, P. C., Gerstman, L. T., & In W. H. Warren & R. E. Shaw (Eds.), Persistence and cue for,Sat maltingTempo aweenychange as ‘ change: Proceedings ofthefirst international conference of Experimental Psychology, 52, 127-137. . ai on eventt perceptioni (pp. . 1-27).1-27). Hillsdale,Hi NJ: : Erlbaum . 

- Luce, D., & Clark, M. (1967). Physical correlates of ‘ brass-instrument tones, Journal ofthe Acoustical Society Received. January 25, 1984 ofAmerica, 42, 1232-1243, Revision received June 4, 1984 @ 

