## HUMAN FACTORS, 1995, 37(1), 32-64 Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in Dynamic Systems 

MICA R. ENDSLEY,! Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas 

This paper presents a theoretical model of situation awareness based on its role in dynamic human decision making in a variety of domains. Situation awareness is presented as a predominant concern in system operation, based on a descriptive view of decision making. The relationship between situation awareness and numerous individual and environmental factors is explored. Among these factors, attention and working memory are presented as critical factors limiting operators from acquiring and interpreting information from the environment to form situation awareness, and mental models and goal-directed behavior are hypothesized as important mechanisms for overcoming these limits. The impact of design features, workload, stress, system complexity, and automation on operator situation awareness is addressed, and a taxonomy of errors in situation awareness is introduced, based on the model presented. The model is used to generate design implications for enhancing operator situation awareness and future directions for situation awareness research. 

INTRODUCTION vironments and the utility of using a model of The range of problems confronting. human facdecision making that takes SA into account,. and. tors Ppractitioners has continued to 8grow over (b) a theory of SA that expands on prior work in or the past 50 years. Practitioners must deal wither this ararea (Endsley, 1988a,. 1990c, 1993b). True human performance in. tasks that are primarily. . SA, it will. be shown, involves far. more than . . merely being aware of numerous pieces of data. physical or perceptual, as well as consider hu. man behaviorerinvolving. highly: complex cogni-. It—, also. requires a much. more advancedae level of . Ls . situation understanding and a projection of futive tasks with increasing frequency. As technol— , ogy has evolved, many complex, dynamic. ture system states in light of the operator’s persystems have been created that tax the abilitieseyegs tinent goals. As such, SA presentswae a. level of focus. of humans to act as effective,: timely. decision. that goes. beyond traditional. information-. . makers when operating. these systems. The opprocessing approaches. in attempting: to explain os . . human behavior in operating complex systems. erator’s situation awareness (SA) will be pre. . . sented as a crucial. construct on which. decisiona SA can be shown to be important in a vari: . . ety of contexts that confront human factors making and performance in such systems hinge. wee In this. paper I strive. to show (a) the impor-: practitioners.. . tance of SA in: decisionvs makingoarin dynamic. en. Aircraft. In the area with. perhaps the: longest history, SA was recognized as a crucial com' modity for crews of military aircraft as far back DepartmentRequests offor Industrialreprints Engineering,should be sent Texasto Mica Tech University,R. Endsley, as World War I (Press, 1986). SA has grown in. Lubbock, TX 79409. importance as a major design goal for civil, © 1995, Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. All rights reserved. 

## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—33 

commercial, and military aircraft, receiving ing loss of life, such as in the case of the U.S.S. particular emphasis in recent years (Federal Vincennes. Incorrect SA concerning an incoming Aviation Administration, 1990; U.S. Air Force aircraft (from confusing identification signals 57th Fighter Wing, 1986). In the flight environand a lack of direct information on changes in ment, the safe operation of the aircraft ina manaltitude) led to the downing of a commercial airner consistent with the pilot’s goals is highly deliner and subsequent loss of all aboard. From pendent on a current assessment of the changing __ reports of the accident (Klein, 1989a), it appears situation, including details of the aircraft's opthat the decision makers’ SA was in error (pererational parameters, external conditions, naviceived hostility of the incoming aircraft), not the gational information, other aircraft, and hostile decision as to what to do (if hostile, warn off and factors. Without this awareness (which needs then shoot down if not heeded). This is an imto be both accurate and complete), the airportant distinction that highlights the criticality crew will be unable to effectively perform their ‘of SA in dynamic decision making. functions. Indeed, as will be discussed further, Other. Many other everyday activities call for even small lapses in SA can have catastrophic a dynamic update of the situation to function repercussions. effectively. Walking, driving in heavy traffic, or Air traffic control. In a related environment, operating heavy machinery surely call for SA. air traffic controllers are called on to sort out Roschelle and Greeno (1987) reported that exand project the paths of ever-increasing num- _ perts in solving physics problems rely on the debers of aircraft in order to ensure goals of minvelopment of a situational classification. Gaba, imum separation and safe, efficient landing and Howard, and Small (1995, this issue) describe takeoff operations. This taxing job relies on the _ the role of SA in medical decision making. As SA of controllers who must maintain up-to-date humans typically operate in a closed-loop manassessments of the rapidly changing locations of ner, input from the environment is almost alaircraft (in three-dimensional space) and their ways necessary. projected locations relative to each other, along The need for SA applies in a wide variety of with other pertinent aircraft parameters (destienvironments. Acquiring and maintaining SA nation, speed, communications, etc.). becomes increasingly difficult, however, as the Large-systems operations. The operators of complexity and dynamics of the environment inlarge, complex systems such as flexible manu-_ crease. In dynamic environments, many decifacturing systems, refineries, and nuclear power sions are required across a fairly narrow space plants must also rely on up-to-date knowledge of _ of time, and tasks are dependent on an ongoing, situation parameters to manage effectively. In up-to-date analysis of the environment. Because their tasks, operators must observe the state of _ the state of the environment is constantly changnumerous system parameters and any patterns ing, often in complex ways, a major portion of among them that might reveal clues as to the _ the operator’s job becomes that of obtaining and functioning of the system and future process maintaining good SA. This task ranges from state changes (Wirstad, 1988). Without this untrivial to one of the major factors determining derstanding and prediction, human control operator performance. In analyzing the decicould not be effective. sion making of tactical commanders, Kaempf, Tactical and strategic systems. Similarly, fireWolf, and Miller (1993, p. 1110) reported that fighters, certain police units, and military com“recognizing the situation provided the chalmand personnel rely on SA to make their decilenge to the decision maker,” confirming SA’s sions. They must ascertain the critical features criticality. in widely varying situations to determine the In each of the domains discussed, operators best course of action. Inaccurate or incomplete must do more than simply perceive the state of SA in these environments can lead to devastattheir environment. They must understand the 

In each of the domains discussed, operators must do more than simply perceive the state of their environment. They must understand the 

## 34—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

integrated meaning of what they are perceiving in light of their goals. Situation awareness, as such, incorporates an operator’s understanding of the situation as a whole, forming a basis for decision making. Researchers in many areas have found that expert decision makers will act first to classify and understand a situation, immediately proceeding to action selection (Klein, 1989b; Klein, Calderwood, and Clinton-Cirocco, 1986; Lipshitz, 1987; Noble, Boehm-Davis, and Grosz, 1987; Sweller, 1988). 

egies may become more important in these cases as forming an assessment of the situation becomes more challenging. 

Given that SA plays such a critical role in decision making, particularly in complex and dynamic environments, there is a need to more explicitly incorporate the concept into human factors design efforts. A theory of SA that clearly defines the construct and its relation to human decision making and performance is needed to fulfill this mission. 

There is evidence that an integrated picture of A MODEL OF SITUATION AWARENESS the current situation may be matched to prototypical situations in memory, each prototypical Because direct research on SA itself is limited situation corresponding to a ‘‘correct” action or and has been conducted only in recent years, a decision. Dreyfus (1981) presented a treatise thorough and rigorously defined theory may not that emphasized the role of situational underyet be possible. The present objective is to define standing in real-world, expert decision making, a common ground for discussion using the inforbuilding on the extensive works of deGroot mation that is available in order to provide a (1965) in chess, Mintzburg (1973) in managerial _ starting point for future work on SA. decision making, and Kuhn (1970) in science. In This information will be presented in a frameeach of these areas the experts studied used patwork model—a model that is descriptive of the tern-matching mechanisms to draw on longSA phenomenon and that synthesizes informaterm memory structures that allowed them to tion from a variety of areas. It will explicitly quickly understand a given situation. They then address certain attributes of the construct. Speadopted the course of action corresponding to cifically, Klein (1989b) stated that a desired thethat type of situation. Hinsley, Hayes, and Siory of situation awareness should explain dymon (1977) have found that this situation clasnamic goal selection, attention to appropriate sification can occur almost immediately, or, as_ critical cues, expectancies regarding future Klein (1989b) has pointed out, it can involve _ states of the situation, and the tie between situsome effort to achieve. ation awareness and typical actions. Within this In his studies of fire ground commanders, context, it is the goal of this effort to delineate Klein (1989b) found that a conscious deliberawhat SA is and what it is not, to provide an tion of solution alternatives was rare. Rather, understanding of the mechanisms that underlie the majority of the time, experts focused onclasthe construct, and to discuss the factors that sifying the situation in order to immediately may influence it. The implications of the model yield the appropriate solution from memory. for design, error investigation, and future reKaempf et al. (1993) reported that of 183 decisearch will be discussed. (This discussion will be sions by tactical commanders, 95% used this illustrated by examples of SA from the aircraft type of recognition decision strategy, involving domain; however, it applies equally to other either feature matching to situation prototypes contexts presented earlier.) (87%) or story building (13%). Although much of ; . os A Model this work emphasizes the decision processes of experts, novices must also focus a considerable Figure 1 provides a basis for discussing SA in amount of their effort on assessing the state of _ terms of its role in the overall decision-making | the environment in order to make decisions.Coprocess. According to this model, a person’s hen (1993) pointed out that metacognitive stratperception of the relevant elements in the 

SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

March 1995—35 

**==> picture [380 x 303] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
@ System Capability<br>e Interface Design<br>© Stress & Workload<br>« Complexity<br>¢ Automation<br>SITUATION AWARENESS |<br>State Perception \Comprehension | Projection Performance<br>Of The Of Elements | Of Current Of Future Decision of<br>Environment InSituationCurrent | situation Status Actions<br>evel Level 2 Level 3 ;<br>Individual Factor wae<br>Information Processing<br>© Preconceptions<br>(Expectations) Tong<br>em —<br>°e<br>*Training<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 1. Model of situation awareness in dynamic decision making. 

environment, as determined from system displays or directly by the senses, forms the basis for his or her SA. Action selection and performance are shown as separate stages that will proceed directly from SA. 

which it provides it. All system designs are not equal in their ability to convey needed information or in the degree to which they are compatible with basic human information-processing abilities. Other features of the task environment, including workload, workload, stress, and complexity, may also affect SA. The role of each of these individual and system factors in relation to SA will be addressed. 

Several major factors are shown to influence including workload, workload, this process. First, individuals vary in their abilalso affect SA. The role ity to acquire SA, given the same data input. ual and system factors in This is hypothesized to be a function of an indiaddressed. vidual’s. information-processing. processing mechanisms,me Definitionswae and Terminology. influenced by innate abilities, experience, and training. In addition, the individual may possess Contrary to Sarter and certain preconceptions and objectives that can sue), who who believe that act to filter and interpret the environment in SA is futile and not forming SA. first necessary to clearly define 

Contrary to Sarter and Woods (1995, this issue), who who believe that developing a definition of SA is futile and not constructive, I believe it is first necessary to clearly define SA. The term has lately become the victim of rather loose usage, with different individuals redefining it at whim, leading to the recent criticism that SA is the 

SA will also be a function of the system design in terms of the degree to which the system provides the needed information and the form in 

36—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

“buzzword of the 90s” (Wiener, 1993, p.4). Un- _ arately. (This stance also differs from that taken less researchers stick to a clear, consistent by the U.S. Air Force [Judge, 1992], which has meaning for the term, the problem will presenta adopted a definition of SA that includes action significant handicap to progress. and decision making, in contrast to most prior 

by the U.S. Air Force [Judge, 1992], which has adopted a definition of SA that includes action and decision making, in contrast to most prior research on SA.) 

In conjunction with the model, therefore, a research on SA.) few issues will be stated explicitly to clarify the Similarly, SA is presented as a construct seppresent formulation of SA. As a matter of conarate from others that may influence it. Attensistent terminology, it is first necessary to distion, working memory, workload, and stress are tinguish the term situation awareness, asa state all related constructs constructs that can affect SA but but that of knowledge, from the processes used to achieve _ can also be be seen as as separate from from it. Subsuming that state. These processes, which may vary any of these of these constructs within within the term term situation widely among individuals and contexts, will be awareness loses sight of the the independent and inreferred to as situation assessment or as the pro-__ teractive nature of these factors. SA and workcess of achieving, acquiring, or maintaining SA. load, for instance, have been shown to vary in(This differs from recent efforts by Sarter and dependently across a wide range of these Woods [1995, this issue], who view SA as “a va-__ variables (Endsley, 1993a), although workload riety of cognitive processing activities,” in conmay have a negative effect on SA in certain sittrast to most past definitions of SA, which have uations. These factors will be addressed more focused on SA as a state of knowledge.I am in explicitly in a later section. full agreement with Adams, Tenney, and Pew Although numerous definitions of SA have [1995, this issue] that there is great benefit in been proposed (Endsley, 1988a; Fracker, 1988), examining the interdependence of the processes most are not applicable applicable across different task doand the resultant state of knowledge; however, mains. For the most part, however, they all in order to clarify discourse on SA, it is imporpoint to “knowing what is going on.” Referring tant to keep the terminology straight.) to Figure 1, I will use the following general def- 

Similarly, SA is presented as a construct separate from others that may influence it. Attention, working memory, workload, and stress are all related constructs constructs that can affect SA but but that can also be be seen as as separate from from it. Subsuming any of these of these constructs within within the term term situation awareness loses sight of the the independent and interactive nature of these factors. SA and workload, for instance, have been shown to vary independently across a wide range of these variables (Endsley, 1993a), although workload may have a negative effect on SA in certain situations. These factors will be addressed more explicitly in a later section. 

Although numerous definitions of SA have been proposed (Endsley, 1988a; Fracker, 1988), most are not applicable applicable across different task domains. For the most part, however, they all point to “knowing what is going on.” Referring to Figure 1, I will use the following general definition of SA SA (Endsley, 1987b, 1988b): 

Furthermore, SA as defined here does not eninition of SA SA (Endsley, 1987b, 1988b): compass all of a person’s knowledge. It refers to oo, ; ; only that portion. pertainingwo. to the state of a dyementsSituationin awarenessthe environmentis the perceptionwithin a volumeof the el-of namic environment. Established doctrine, rules, time and space, the comprehension of their procedures, checklists, and the like—though immeaning, and the projection of their status in portant and relevant to the decision-making the near future. process—are fairly static knowledge sources Each of the three hierarchical phases and prithat fall outside the boundaries of the term. mary components of this definition will be deIn addition, SA is explicitly recognized as a Scribed in more detail. construct separate from decision making and Level 1 SA: Perception of the Elements in performance. Even the best-trained decision the Environment makers will make the wrong decisions if they have inaccurate or incomplete SA. Conversely, a The first step in achieving SA is to perceive person who has perfect SA may still make the _ the status, attributes, and dynamics of relevant relevant wrong decision (from a lack of training on elements in the environment. A pilot would proper procedures, poor tactics, etc.) or show perceive elements such as aircraft, mountains, poor performance (from an inability tocarry out or warning warning lights along with with their relevant char- relevant charthe necessary actions). SA, decision making, and acteristics (e.g., color, size, speed, location). A performance are different stages with different tactical commander needs accurate data on the factors influencing them and with wholly differlocation, type, number, capabilities, and dyent approaches for dealing with each of them; namics of all enemy and friendly forces in a thus it is important to treat these constructs sepgiven area and and their relationship to other other points 

The first step in achieving SA is to perceive the status, attributes, and dynamics of relevant relevant elements in the environment. A pilot would perceive elements such as aircraft, mountains, or warning warning lights along with with their relevant char- relevant characteristics (e.g., color, size, speed, location). A tactical commander needs accurate data on the location, type, number, capabilities, and dynamics of all enemy and friendly forces in a given area and and their relationship to other other points 

**==> picture [1 x 7] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
|<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—37 

of reference. A flexible manufacturing s **y** stem certain location allowsa ghterfighter ppilot or military operator needs data on the status of machines, commander to project that the aircraft is likely Pparts, flows, and backlogs.g An automobile driver to attack in a ggiven manner. This Ppprovides the needs to know where other vehicles and obstaknowledge (and time) necessaryry to decide on the cles are, their ydynamics, and the status and dy-y most favorable course of action to meet one’s namics of one’s own vehicle. objectives. Similarly, an air traffic controller . needs to put together information on various eve 2 Sh : Comprehension of ththe traffic. patterns to determine: which: runways will be free and where there is a potential for | Comprehension of the situation is based on a_ collisions. An automobile driver also needs to | synthesis of disjointed Level 1 elements. Level 2. detect possible future collisions in order to act SA goes beyond simply being aware of the eleeffectively, and a flexible manufacturing system ments that are present to include an underoperator needs to predict future bottlenecks and | standingg of the significance& of those elements in unused machines for effective scheduling.£ | light of pertinent operator goals. Based on SA, therefore, is based on far more than sim: knowledgeg of Level 1 elements, particularly plyply perceivingg information about the environ| when put together to form patterns with the ment.It includes comprehending the meaning of other elements (gestalt),ro the decision maker that information in an integratedg form, compar-p formscomprehendingp a holistic& thePppicturesignificance8 of the ofenvironment,objectsi and Jingjectedit withfutureoperatorstates ofg thegoals,environmentand pprovidingthatgPareproevents. For example, a military pilot or tactical valuable for decision making. In this aspect, SA commander must comprehend that the appearis a broad construct that is applicable across a ance of three enemyy aircraft within a certain wide variety ofPPapplication areas, with manyy unproximity of one another and in a certain geoderlying cognitive processes in common. graphical location indicates certain things about their objectives. The operator of a power Elements plant needs to put together disparate bits of data Froma design standpoint, a clear understand on individual system variables to determine . oesigt pom how well different system components are funcing of SA in a given environment rests on a clear tioning, deviations from expected values, and elucidation of the elements in the definition— the specificwae locus of any deviantpe readings.. In that is, identifying. which things the operator these environments. a novice. operator might. be needs_.. toaera perceive and understand. These are specapableP of .achievingaethe same Level 1 SA as cificsuch toareindividualthe one partsystemsof SA andthatcontexts,cannot andbe de-as more experienced decision makers but may fall scribed in any valid way across arenas. Although far short of also being able to integrate various . y y , . & data elements along with pertinent goals in orthe pilot and power plant operator each relies on der to comprehend the situation SA, it simply is not realistic or appropriate to P . expect the same elements to be relevant to both. Level 3 SA: Projection of Future Status Nonetheless, these elements can be, and should The ability to project the future actions of the be, specifically determined for various classes of elements in: the environment—at: least in. the s **y** stems. very near term—forms the third and highest Endsley (1993c) presented a methodology for level of SA. This is achieved through knowledge accomplishing this and described such a delinof the status and dynamics of the elements and eation for air-to-air fighter aircraft. Examples of . . . elements in this arena include comprehension of the situation (both Level 1 and Level 2 SA). For example, knowing that a a. Level 1: location, altitude, and heading of threat aircraft is currently offensive and is in a ownship and other aircraft; current target; 

38—March 1995 

HUMAN FACTORS 

detections; system status; location of ground actly which aspects of the environment are imb. threats and obstacles portant for SA. Level 2: mission timing and status; impact of A 5 SA d . inf system degrades; time and distance available n operators SA needs to incorporate inforon fuel; tactical status of threat aircraft (offenmation on that subset of the environment that is c. sive/defensive/neutral) . relevant to tasks and goals. Within this boundvers,Levelfiring3: projectedpositionaircraftand timing.tactics and maneuary, he the elementsel may be be furthfurther subdividebdivided One may alsol talkk about awareness of certain. into levels of importance for SA or may assume subcategories a relevance continuum, depending on the probwa: of SA (usually system specific), 1 ai. & P which . em context. In a piloting context, for example, include requirements across all three lev. . : els . . the relevance of different aircraft will depend on of SA. For instance, spatial awareness or geotheir | . d drelati hi d hical is frequently of concern in eir location and speed relative to ownship an Brapnica’ awareness Is req y the pilot’s goals (e.g., response to an immediate aircraft. Mode awareness, as discussed by Sarter ° paeaeen ; and _ . threat, tactics determination, or long-term misof Woods (1995, this issue), is another example sion replanning); a different amount of rele a subset of SA that may be of concern in ceran . : tain systems, across all hres levels (e.g., “What Vance may be indicated for different goals. In vain sys aera e. other contexts, such as manufacturing or power is it doing, why is it doing that, what will it do . next?”)Co plant environments, relevance of elements may Time be determinedtional relationships by theof spatial, elements temporal, orto goals. funcIn this way, elements may vary in their rele; Several other aspects of SA should be menvance across time, although they do not genertioned at this point. First, although SA has been ally fall out of consideration completely. At least discussed as a person's knowledge of the envisome SA on all elements has been found to be ronment at a given point in time, it is highly needed, even if this conveys merely that the eltemporal in nature. That is, SA is not necessarily ement is not very important at the moment. For acquired instantaneously but is built up over instance, while in close combat, many pilots retime. Thus it takes into account the dynamics of port that they are interested only in where their the situation that are acquirable only over time opponent is. Too frequently, however, though and that are used to project the state of the enthey are successful in avoiding enemy missiles, vironment in the near future. So although SA they end up flying into the ground with lethal consists ofan operator's knowledge of the state results (Kuipers, Kappers, van Holten, van Berof the environment at any point in time, this gen, and Oosterveld, 1989; McCarthy, 1988). In knowledge includes temporal aspects of that enorder to know that they can afford to pay less vironment, relating to both the past and the attention to altitude than to enemy aircraft, pifuture. lots need to know that they are at least above a Space certain level at all times. A certain amount of SA on other elements is required at all times in a It has been observed that SA is highly spatial similar manner. in many contexts. Pilots and air traffic controllers, for instance, are concerned with the spatial Team SA relationships among multiple aircraft, and this information also yields important temporal It is possible to talk about SA in terms of cues.with Manyy other fields mayy also be concerned teams as well as individuals. In manyy situaships the spatialPp as well as functional relation- _ tions several individuals mayy work togetherg as a P amongg systemsy components.P In addition to team to make decisions and carry rry out actions. In | its aspect as a frequent “element” of SA, spatial this case one can conceive of overall team SA, information is highly useful for determining exwhereby each team member has a specific set of 

> || SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—39 

SA elements about which he or she is concerned, SA of the team has suffered and performance as determined by each member's responsibilimay suffer as well unless the discrepancy is corties within the team. rected. How that information transmission oc} SA for a team can be represented as shown in curs—the process of achieving SA—can vary. It Figure 2. Some overlap between each team may constitute a verbal exchange or separate, member’s SA requirements will be present. It is direct viewing of displays, with each individual this subset of information that constitutes much independently acquiring information on the sta| of team coordination. That coordination may octus of the aircraft. Higher levels of SA that may | cur as a verbal exchange, as a duplication of disnot be directly presented on displays may be | played information, or by some other means.As communicated verbally, or, if the team mem| such, the quality of team members’ SA of shared bers possess a shared mental model (Salas, | elements (as a state of knowledge) may serve as_ Prince, Baker, and Shrestha, 1995, this issue), | an index of team coordination or humaneach team member may achieve the same | machine interface effectiveness. higher-level SA without necessitating extra ver| Overall team SA can be conceived as the debal communication. Mosier and Chidester | gree to which every team member possesses the (1991), for example, found that better-per| SA required for his or her responsibilities. This forming teams actually communicated less than is independent of any overlaps in SA requiredid poorer-performing teams. In this case, the ments that may be present. If each of two team degree to which each team member has accurate members needs to knowa piece of information, SA on shared items could serve as an index of | it is not sufficient that one knows perfectly but the quality of team communications (i.e., each | the other not at all. Every team member must member's ability to achieve the goal of commu| have SA for all of his or her own requirements or _ nication as efficiently as possible). | become the proverbial chain's weakest link. Link to Decision Making For instance, in an aircraft cockpit, both the pilot and copilot may need to know certain In addition to forming the basis for decision pieces of information. If the copilot has this inmaking as a major input, SA may also impact formation but the pilot in charge does not, the the process of decision making itself. There is considerable evidence that a person’s manner of . characterizing a situation will determine the decision process chosen to solve a problem. MankTeam Team telow and Jones (1987) reviewed the literature Member Member concerning deductive problem solving and lero sts Beats showed, through numerous studies, that the situation parameters or context of a problem largely determines the ability of individuals to Nas Gi adopt an effective problem-solving strategy. It is C’ the situation specifics that determine the adop{> \ tion of an appropriate mental model, leading to the selection of problem-solving strategies. In the absence of an appropriate model, people will Mecber wean often fail to solve a new problem, even though 3SA ASA they would have to apply the same logic as that Elements Elements used for a familiar problem. Other evidence suggests that even the way a given problem is presented (or framed) can deFigure 2. Team situation awareness. termine how the problem is solved (Bettman 

## 40—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

and Kakkar, 1977; Herstein, 1981; Sundstrom, 1987; Tversky and Kahneman, 1981). The simplest explanation for this is that different problem framings can induce different information integration (situation comprehension), and this determines the selection of a mental model to use for solving the problem. Thus it is not only the detailed situational information (Level 1 SA) but also the way the pieces are put together (Level 2 SA) that direct decision strategy selection. 

environment as they affect the operator's ability to achieve SA. 

Although some researchers have continued to argue that relatively little is known about SA (Sarter and Woods, 1991), this belies the vast amount of highly pertinent work that has been done—specifically, research devoted to more general aspects of human cognition. Although members of the psychology community continue to debate the exact structure and nature of information-processing mechanisms, a detailed discussion of various theories regarding each lies beyond the scope of this paper. Thus, the relationship between SA and between SA and SA and and these mechanisms, as generally understood, will be explored. 

. discussion of various theories regarding each Link to Performance lies beyond the scope of this paper. Thus, the The relationship between SA and perforrelationship between SA and between SA and SA and and these mechanisms, mance, though not always direct, can also be as generally understood, will be explored. predicted. In general, it is expected that poor In combination, the mechanisms of shortperformance will occur when SA is incomplete term sensory memory, perception, working or inaccurate, when the correct action for the memory, and long-term memory form the basic identified situation is not known or calculated, structures on which on which which SA is based. Figure 3 shows or when time or some other factor limits a pera schematic description of the role of each of son’s ability to carry out the correct action. For these structures in the SA process. instance, in an air-to-air combat mission, EndsPreattentive Processing ley (1990b) found that SA was significantly related to performance only for those subjects who According to most research on information had the technical and operational capabilities to processing (for a review see Norman, 1976, or take advantage of such knowledge. The same Wickens, 1992a), environmental features are inistudy found that poor SA would not necessarily __ tially processed processed in parallel parallel through preattentive lead to poor performance if subjects realized sensory stores in which certain properties are their lack of SA and were able to modify their detected, such as spatial proximity, color, simbehavior to reduce the possibility of poor perple properties of shapes, shapes, or movement movement (Neisser, formance. Venturino, Hamilton, and Dvorchak 1967; Treisman and Paterson, 1984), providing (1989) also found that performance was precues for further focalized attention. Those obdicted by a combination of SA and decision jects that are most salient, based on preattenmaking (fire-point selection) in combat pilots. tively registered characteristics, will be further Good SA can therefore be viewed asa factor that processed using focalized attention to achieve will increase the probability of good perforperception. Cue salience, therefore, will have a mance but cannot necessarily guarantee it. large impact on which portions of the environHUMAN PROPERTIES AFFECTING AND ment are initially attended to, and these eleUNDERLYING SA ments will form the basis for the first level of SA. will form the basis for the first level of SA. form the basis for the first level of SA. the basis for the first level of SA. basis for the first level of SA. for the first level of SA. the first level of SA. first level of SA. level of SA. of SA. SA. Within this basic model of SA, I will discuss “4“¢"##0" the factors underlying and influencing the SA The deployment deployment of attention attention in the perception process. This discussion will first focus on charprocess acts to present certain constraints on a acteristics of the individual, including relevant _ person’s ability to accurately perceive multiple information-processing mechanisms and conitems in parallel and, as such, parallel and, as such, and, as such, as such, such, is a major a major major limit on on structs that play a role in achieving SA. It will SA. Direct attention is needed for not only perproceed to factors related to the system and task ceiving and processing the cues attended to but 

In combination, the mechanisms of shortterm sensory memory, perception, working memory, and long-term memory form the basic structures on which on which which SA is based. Figure 3 shows a schematic description of the role of each of these structures in the SA process. 

According to most research on information processing (for a review see Norman, 1976, or Wickens, 1992a), environmental features are initially processed processed in parallel parallel through preattentive sensory stores in which certain properties are detected, such as spatial proximity, color, simple properties of shapes, shapes, or movement movement (Neisser, 1967; Treisman and Paterson, 1984), providing cues for further focalized attention. Those objects that are most salient, based on preattentively registered characteristics, will be further processed using focalized attention to achieve perception. Cue salience, therefore, will have a large impact on which portions of the environment are initially attended to, and these elements will form the basis for the first level of SA. will form the basis for the first level of SA. form the basis for the first level of SA. the basis for the first level of SA. basis for the first level of SA. for the first level of SA. the first level of SA. first level of SA. level of SA. of SA. SA. “4“¢"##0" 

The deployment deployment of attention attention in the perception process acts to present certain constraints on a _ person’s ability to accurately perceive multiple items in parallel and, as such, parallel and, as such, and, as such, as such, such, is a major a major major limit on on SA. Direct attention is needed for not only perceiving and processing the cues attended to but 

March 1995—41 

## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

**==> picture [389 x 300] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
cua<br>SITUATION AWARENESS J |Py)<br>SENSORY STORE MEMORY<br>ou is dh COMPREHENSION MAKING GUIDANCE<br>ronmr PROJECTION<br>SHORTTERM halliCSERS]<br>MATCHING/ 5<br>CATEGORIZATION= Waa4 J<br>6 fb) )))) r 4 LEARNING/ MEMORY STORAGE<br>MEMORY Dy 4<br>RESPONSE FEEDBACK<br>Figure 3. Mechanisms of situation awareness {reprinted from Endsley, 1988a).<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


also the later stages of decision making and re-__ sponse execution. In complex and dynamic environments, attention demands resulting from information overload, complex decision making, and multiple tasks can quickly exceed a person’s limited attention capacity. 

that target. In addition to highly salient cues catching one’s attention, therefore, people are active participants in determining which elements of the environment will becomea part of their (Level 1) SA by directing their attention based on goals and objectives and on the basis of long-term and working memory (each of which which will be discussed in more detail). 

Operators of complex systems frequently emlong-term and working memory (each of which which ploy a process of information sampling to cirwill be discussed in more detail). cumvent this limit. They attend to information In a study of pilot SA, Fracker (1989) showed in rapid sequence following a pattern dictated that a limited supply of attention was allocated by the portion of long-term memory concerning _ to environmental elements based on their abilrelative priorities and the frequency with which ity to contribute to task success. Because the information changes (Wickens, 1992a). Working supply of attention is limited, more attention to memory also plays an important role, allowing some elements (resulting in improved SA on one to modify attention deployment on the basis _ these elements), however, may meana loss of SA of other information perceived or active goals on other elements once the limit is reached, (Braune and Trollip, 1982). For example, percepwhich can occur rather quickly in complex ention of a strange noise may prompt a pilot to vironments. In an investigation of factors leadlook at the engine status indicator. When ining to fighter aircraft accidents involving convolved in the goal of shooting at an enemy airtrolled descent into the terrain, Kuipers et al. craft, attention may be directed primarily at (1989) cited lack of attention to primary flight 

## 42—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

instruments (56%) and too much attention to expectation about what they will encounter that target planes during combat (28%) as major predisposes them to perceive the information causes. Focusing on only certain elements led to accordingly. They will process the information a lack of SA and fatal consequences. faster if it is in agreement with those expectaIn addition to information sampling, it may _ tions and will be more likely to make an error if be possible to work around attention limits in _ it is not (Jones, 1977). other ways to some degree. Kahneman (1973) Long-term memory stores also play a signifistated that attentional resources can be incant role in classifying perceived information creased somewhat by physiological arousal into known categories or mental representations mechanisms. Further relief to attention limitaas an almost immediate act in the perception tions can be provided through people’s ability to _ process (Hinsley et al., 1977). Categorization is divide their attention under certain circumbased on integrated information and typically stances. Wickens’s multiple resource theory occurs in a deterministic, nearly optimal man(1992a) provides a model for determining which _ ner (Ashby and Gott, 1988). The classification of types of information can be most easily attended information into understood representations to in parallel. Damos and Wickens (1980) also forms Level 1 SA and provides the basic buildfound that attention sharing is a skill thatcan be _ ing blocks for the higher levels of SA. learned and that some people excel at it over With well-developed memory stores, very fine others. In addition, limitations of attention may categorizations may be possible. For instance, be circumvented to some degree through the dean experienced pilot will be able to classify obvelopment of automaticity. served aircraft into exact models (e.g., F-18c vs. . F-18d). This highly detailed classification proPerception : . . : vides the pilot with access to detailed knowledge In addition to affecting the selection of eleabout the capabilities of the aircraft (from longments for perception, for perception, perception, the way in which informa- way in which informa- in which informa- which informa- informaterm memory). A novice may not be able to tion is perceived is directed by the contents of _ make this level of classification and would conboth working memory and long-term memory. sequently have less information from the same Advanced knowledge of the characteristics, data input. 

In addition to affecting the selection of elements for perception, for perception, perception, the way in which informa- way in which informa- in which informa- which informa- information is perceived is directed by the contents of both working memory and long-term memory. Advanced knowledge of the characteristics, form, and location of information, for instance, can significantly facilitate the perception of information (Barber and Folkard, 1972; Biederman, Mezzanotte, Rabinowitz, Francolin, and Plude, 1981; Davis, Kramer, and Graham, 1983; Humphreys, 1981; Palmer, 1975; Posner, Nissen, and Ogden, 1978). That is, one’s preconceptions or expectations about information will affect the speed and accuracy of the perception of that information (Jones, 1977, pp. 38-39). 

The cues used to achieve these classifications are important to SA. With higher levels of ex_pertise, people appear to develop knowledge of critical cues in the environment that allow them to make very fine classifications. The development of memory structures for this process will be discussed more fully subsequently. At this juncture it is important to note that the classification made in the perception stage (right or wrong, detailed or gross) is a function of the knowledge available for making such classifications and will produce the elements of Level 1 SA. 

Repeated experience in an environment allows one to develop expectations about future events. In the aircraft environment, premission briefings typically build up preconceptions about what will be encountered during the mission. An air traffic controller’s report of traffic at a particular altitude or a bill of lading that ac| companies a shipment in a manufacturing environment each develops in recipients a certain 

Working Memory Once perceived, information is stored in working memory. In the absence of other mechanisms (such as relevant long-term memory stores), most of a person’s active processing of 

## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—43 

> | Newinformationinformationmustmustoccurbe incombinedworkingwithmemory.existcasethat can bebeingthat can bebeing can bebeingbeing filledconsidered. in withA the particularsscript—aconsidered. in withA the particularsscript—a in withA the particularsscript—a withA the particularsscript—aA the particularsscript—a the particularsscript—ascript—a special fortype the fortype thetype the the | ing knowledge and a composite picture of the of schema—provides sequences of appropriate situation developed (Level 2 SA). Projections of actions for different types of task performance future status (Level 3 SA) and subsequent deci(Schank and Abelson, 1977). Ties between schesions as to appropriate courses of action must mata and scripts can greatly facilitate the cogoccur in working memory as well. In this cirnitive process because an individual does not cumstance, a heavy load is imposed on working have to actively actively decide on appropriate actions at on appropriate actions at appropriate actions at actions at at memory, as it is taxed with simultaneously — every turn but will automatically know the acachieving the higher levels of SA (Levels 2 and tions to take for a given situation based on its 3), formulating and selecting responses, and carassociated script. rying out subsequent actions. A related concept is the mental model. Rouse 

casethat can bebeingthat can bebeing can bebeingbeing filledconsidered. in withA the particularsscript—aconsidered. in withA the particularsscript—a in withA the particularsscript—a withA the particularsscript—aA the particularsscript—a the particularsscript—ascript—a special fortype the fortype thetype the the of schema—provides sequences of appropriate actions for different types of task performance (Schank and Abelson, 1977). Ties between schemata and scripts can greatly facilitate the cognitive process because an individual does not have to actively actively decide on appropriate actions at on appropriate actions at appropriate actions at actions at at every turn but will automatically know the actions to take for a given situation based on its associated script. 

A related concept is the mental model. Rouse and Morris (1985) defined mental models as ‘‘mechanisms whereby humans humans are able to generate descriptions of system system purpose and form, explanations of system functioning and observed system states, and predictions of future states” (p. 7). They stated that experts will develop mental models in a a shift from from representational to abstract codes. From this definition, mental models can be described as complex schemata that are used used to model model the behavior of of systems. Therefore, a mental model can be viewed as a schema for a certain system. Related to this is the situational model (or situation model), a term used by VanDijk and Kintsch (1983) and by Roschelle and Greeno (1987), which will be defined as a schema depicting the current state of the system model (and often developed in light of the system model). Rasmussen (1986) also used the term internal dynamic world model with the same general meaning. The terms situation model and situation awareness will be defined here as equivalent. A situation model (i.e., SA) can be matched to schemata in memory that depict prototypical situations or states of the system model. These prototypical classifications may be linked to associated goals or scripts that dictate decision making and action performance. This provides a mechanism for the single-step, “recognitionprimed” decision making described earlier. This process is hypothesized to be a key mechanism whereby people are able to efficiently process a large amount of environmental information to achieve SA. A well-developed mental model provides (a) knowledge of the relevant elements of 

Wickens (1984, p. 201) has stated that predicand Morris (1985) defined mental models as tion of future states (the culmination of good SA) ‘‘mechanisms whereby humans humans are able to genimposes a heavy load on working memory by _ erate descriptions of system system purpose and form, requiring the maintenance of present condiexplanations of system functioning and obtions, future conditions, rules used to generate served system states, and predictions of future the latter from the former, and actions that are _ states” (p. 7). They stated that experts will deappropriate to the future conditions. Fracker velop mental models in a a shift from from representa(1987) hypothesized that working memory contional to abstract codes. From this definition, stitutes the main bottleneck for SA. This is most mental models can be described as complex likely the case for novices or those dealing with schemata that are used used to model model the behavior of of novel situations. systems. Therefore, a mental model can be 

## Long-Term Memory 

In practice long-term memory structures can be used to circumvent the limitations of working memory. The exact organization of knowledge in long-term memory has received diversified characterization, including episodic memory, semantic networks, schemata, and mental models. This discussion will focus on schemata and mental models that have been discussed as important for effective decision making in a number of environments (Braune and Trollip, 1982; Rasmussen and Rouse, 1981) and that are hypothesized to play an important role in SA. Schemata provide coherent frameworks for understanding information, encompassing highly complex system components, states, and functioning (Bartlett, 1932; Mayer, 1983). Much of the details of situations are lost when information is coded in this manner, but the information becomes more coherent and organized for storage, retrieval, and further processing. A single schema may serve to organize several sets of information and as such will have variables 

44—March 1995 

HUMAN FACTORS 

the system that can be used in directing attention and classifying information in the perception process, (b) a means of integrating the elements to form an understanding of their meaning (Level 2 SA), and (c) a mechanism for projecting future states of the system based on its current state and an understanding of its dynamics (Level 3 SA). For example, a pilot may perceive several aircraft (considered to be important elements per the mental model) recognized as enemy fighter jets (based on critical cues) that are approaching in a particular spatial arrangement (forming Level 1 SA). By pattern-matching to prototypes in memory, these separate pieces of information may be classified as a particular recognized aircraft formation (Level 2 SA). According to an internally held mental model, the pilot is able to generate probable attack scenarios for this type of formation when in relation to an aircraft with the location and flight vector of his or her ownship (Level 3 SA). Based on this high-level SA, the pilot is then able to select prescribed tactics (a script) that dictate exactly what evasive ma-_ neuvers should be taken. 

The key to using these models to achieve SA | keyrestsfeatures on the abilityin the environment—criticalof the individual to recognize cues— that will map to key features in the model. The model can then provide for much of the higher levels of SA (comprehension and projection) without loading working memory. In cases in which scripts have been developed for given prototypical situation conditions, the load on working memory for generating alternative behaviors and selecting among them is even further diminished. 

A major advantage of this mechanism is that the current situation need not be exactly like one encountered before. This is a result of categorization mapping (a best fit between the characteristics of the situation and the characteristics of known categories or prototypes). Of primeimportance is that this process can be almost instantaneous because of the superior abilities of human pattern-matching mechanisms. When an individual has a well-developed mental model 

for the behavior of particular systems or domains, the model will provide (a) for the dynamic direction of attention to critical cues, (b) expectations regarding future states of the environment (including what to expect as well as what not to expect) based on the projection mechanisms of the model, and (c) a direct, single-step link between recognized situation clas_ sifications and typical actions. 

Development. Schemata and mental models are developed as a function of training and experience in a given environment. A novice in an area may have only a vague idea of important system components and sketchy rules or heuristics for determining the behavior he or she should employ with the system. With experience, recurrent situational components will be noticed along with recurrent associations and causal relationships. This forms the basis for early schema or model development. 

Holland, Holyoak, Nisbett, and Thagard (1986) provided a thorough description of the development of mental models. According to their description, an individual will learn (a) categorization functions that allow people to map from objects in the real world to a representative category in their mental model, and (b) model transition functions that describe how objects in the model will change over time. By repeatedly comparing the predictions of their internal model with the actual states of the system, individuals will progressively refine their models to develop more specific and numerous categorization functions which allow for moreaccurate predictions based on detailed object characteristics and better transition functions for these specialized categorizations. This process enables people to progressively refine their classification of a perceived object from an aircraft to fighter aircraft to F-18 to F-18c and gives them a more refined idea of the behavior and capabilities of the aircraft (in order to provide predictions). Their explanation also provides for two more features that are important to recog| nized attributes of situation awareness: default information and confidence levels. Default information. Holland et al.’s (1986) 

## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—45 

explanation includes a “‘Q-morphism” in which which is a degree of uncertainty associated with the default information information for the system the system system is provided in provided in in mental model’s transition function that will pro- model’s transition function that will pro- transition function that will pro- function that will pro- that will pro- will pro- proa higher layer of the the model (i.e., a more more general vide confidence levels associated with prediclevel of classification). classification). These default values may may tions from the model. Similarly, one could hybe used by by individuals to predict system perfor- predict system perfor- system perfor- perforpothesize a degree of uncertainty associated mance unless some specific exception is trigwith the validity of features used to make the gered, in which case the appropriate transition mapping from the real world to categories from the real world to categories the real world to categories real world to categories world to categories to categories categories in the the function for that more detailed classification model. For example, example, if three three sources of informa- informawill be be used. For example, For example, a pilot will make make de- _ tion indicate indicate a certain object certain object is an apple but one an apple but one apple but one but one one cisions based on general knowledge of how _ _ source indicates it is an orange, the object may fighter aircraft maneuver if the specific model of aircraft maneuver if the specific model of maneuver if the specific model of if the specific model of the specific model of specific model of model of of _ be characterized be characterized characterized in the the internal model as an ap- an ap- apaircraft is not known. This feature allows people not known. This feature allows people known. This feature allows people This feature allows people feature allows people allows people people _ ple but with an uncertainty ple but with an uncertainty but with an uncertainty with an uncertainty an uncertainty uncertainty factor attached to attached to to it. to operate effectively on the basis of often lim© VanDijk and Kintsch (1983), in work on ited information. speech understanding, have conceptualized a 

explanation includes a “‘Q-morphism” in which which is a degree of uncertainty associated with the default information information for the system the system system is provided in provided in in mental model’s transition function that will pro- model’s transition function that will pro- transition function that will pro- function that will pro- that will pro- will pro- prohigher layer of the the model (i.e., a more more general vide confidence levels associated with prediclevel of classification). classification). These default values may may tions from the model. Similarly, one could hybe used by by individuals to predict system perfor- predict system perfor- system perfor- perforpothesize a degree of uncertainty associated mance unless some specific exception is trigwith the validity of features used to make the gered, in which case the appropriate transition mapping from the real world to categories from the real world to categories the real world to categories real world to categories world to categories to categories categories in the the function for that more detailed classification model. For example, example, if three three sources of informa- informawill be be used. For example, For example, a pilot will make make de- _ tion indicate indicate a certain object certain object is an apple but one an apple but one apple but one but one one cisions based on general knowledge of how _ _ source indicates it is an orange, the object may fighter aircraft maneuver if the specific model of aircraft maneuver if the specific model of maneuver if the specific model of if the specific model of the specific model of specific model of model of of _ be characterized be characterized characterized in the the internal model as an ap- an ap- apaircraft is not known. This feature allows people not known. This feature allows people known. This feature allows people This feature allows people feature allows people allows people people _ ple but with an uncertainty ple but with an uncertainty but with an uncertainty with an uncertainty an uncertainty uncertainty factor attached to attached to to it. to operate effectively on the basis of often lim© VanDijk and Kintsch (1983), in work on ited information. speech understanding, have conceptualized a In addition, default values for certain features context model that allows uncertainties to be of a system can be used if exact current values _ linked to information from various sources and are not known. Fighter pilots, for example, usutaken into account in the decision process as ally get only limited information about other well as the stated facts. Borrowing this concept, aircraft. They therefore must operate on default any given situation model may include a context information (e.g., it is probably a MIG-29 and feature representing the degree of uncertainty therefore likely traveling at certain approximate regarding the mapping of world information to speed). When more details become available, the internal model and the projections based on their SA becomes more accurate (e.g., knowlthe model. This feature allows people to make edge of the exact airspeed), possibly leading to decisions effectively, despite numerous uncerbetter decisions, but they are still able to make _ tainties, yet small shifts in factors underlying reasonable decisions without perfect informathe uncertainties can dramatically change retion. This provision of mental models allows exsultant conclusions (Norman, 1983). perts to have access to reasonable defaults that .: : : a Automaticity provide more effective decisions than those of novices who simply have missing information In addition to developing mental models with (or poorer defaults). In many cases, experts may experience, a form of automaticity can be acincorporate this type of default information in quired. Automatic processing tends to be fast, forming SA. autonomous, effortless, and unavailable to conConfidence level. A second important aspect of scious awareness in that it can occur without situation awareness concerns a person’s confiattention (Logan, 1988). Thus automaticity of dence level regarding that SA. People may have certain tasks can significantly benefit SA by proa certain confidence level regarding the accuviding a mechanism for overcoming limited atracy of information they have received based on _ tention capacity. its reliability or source. The confidence level asIn relation to SA, automaticity poses an imsociated with information can influence the deportant question, however. To what degree do cisions that are made using that information people who are functioning automatically have (Norman, 1983). An important aspect of SA, SA? SA, by definition, involves one’s level of therefore, is the person’s confidence concerning awareness, which implies consciousness of that that SA, a feature that has been cited by both information. With automaticity, however, cerpilots and air traffic controllers (Endsley, 1993c; _ tain features of cognitive processing occur below Endsley and Rodgers, 1994). conscious awareness. 

Holland et al. (1986) hypothesized that there 

Logan (1988) provided a detailed discussion of 

## 46—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

automaticity in cognitive processing that he what is still available to awareness. The one exmaintained occurs through a direct-access, sinception to this statement is the possibility of gle-step retrieval of actions to be performed processing based on subliminal stimuli, which from memory. This description of automaticity have been shown to modify affective processes. is consistent with the previous discussion on the Evidence for the role of subliminal stimuli on use of schemata and mental models for matchtypical dynamic decision making, as opposed to ing recognized classes of situations to scripts for affective processes, however, is less apparent. actions.In this process, ‘attention to an object is In addition, the degree to which automatic sufficient to cause retrieval of whatever inforprocessing occurs without any attention or mation has been associated with it in the past’ awareness has been questioned. Reason (1984) (Logan, 1988, p. 587)—that is, to activate the argued that a minimum level of attention is reschema or mental model. quired for all activity—even automatic proWhen processing in this way, an individual cesses—in order to bring appropriate schemata appears to be conscious of the situational eleinto play at the right times and to restrain uninformationments that triggered the automatic retrieval of _wanted schemata from interfering. At this very from memory (SA), but he or she _ low level of attention, there would be no awareprobably will not be conscious of the mechaness (equated with consciousness) of the denisms used in arriving at the resultant action tailed procedures. Once a plan has been put into selection. That is, a person will know the Level 1 motion, it serves to execute scripts and process elements (e.g., there is an engine problem), even schema as instructed. though he or she may not be aware of or be able An example of the possibility of decision makto articulate the critical cues that led to that ing without conscious SA is that of a person knowledge (e.g., a slight change in engine pitch; driving home from work who follows the same Nisbett and Wilson, 1977) and may not be able predetermined path, stops at stoplights, reto identify the process used to arrive at a decisponds to brake lights, and goes with the flow of sion because it was directly retrieved from _ traffic, yet can report almost no recollection of memory as the appropriate script for that situthe trip. Did this person truly operate with no ation (Bowers, 1991; Manktelow and Jones, conscious awareness? Or, is it that only a low 1987). As expressed by Dreyfus (1981), the indilevel of attention was allocated to this routine vidual knows the what but not the how. If asked _ task, keying on critical environmental features to explain why a particular decision was made, _ that automatically evoked appropriate actions? an individual will usually have to construct The low level of consciousness simply did not some rationale using logical processes to proprovide sufficient salience to allow that Pparticvide an explanation of the action he or she ac-__ ular drive home to be retrieved from memory as tually chose in an automatic, nonanalytic mandistinguishable from a hundred other such trips. ner (through the direct link of prototypical I would argue, in agreement with Reason (1984), Situations to scripts). The state of the situation that this latter alternative is far more likely. itself (SA), however, can still be verbalized as it Several authors in support of this view have is in awareness. (This process has direct implifound that when effortful processing is not used, cations for the measurement of SA, which is adinformation can be retained in long-term memdressed in the following article in this issue.) ory and can affect subject responses (Jacoby and This account is consistent with Nisbett and Dallas, 1981; Kellog, 1980; Tulving, 1985). Wilson’s (1977) review of people’s awareness of The major implications of the use of autoand ability to report on mental events. In all of | matic processes are (a) good performance with the cases presented by Nisbett and Wilson, it minimal attention allocation, (b) significant difwould appear that the how becomes occluded _ficulty in accurately reporting on the internal through the use of automatic processes but the models used for such processing and possibly on 

SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

March 1995—47 

| reporting which key environmental features | were related, and (c) unreliability and inaccu|| racyBasedofonreportingthis discussion,on processesautomaticityafter theis theo-fact. || overcomingrized to provide humananinformation-processingimportant mechanismlim-for itations in achieving SA and making decisions in complex, dynamic environments. 

decision maker then selects activities that will bring the perceived environment into line with his or her plans and goals based on that understanding. 

Simultaneously with this top-down process, bottom-up processing will occur. Patterns in the environment may be recognized that will indicate that new plans are necessary to meet active goals or that different goals should be activated. In this way a person’s current goals and plans may change to be responsive to events in the environment. The alternating of top-down and | bottom-up processing allows a person to process effectively in a dynamic environment. 

The primary hazard created by automatic cognitive processing is an increased risk of being less responsive to new stimuli, as automatic processes operate with limited use of feedback. A lower level of SA could result in atypical situations, decreasing decision timeliness and effectiveness. For example, when a new stop sign is suddenly erected on a familiar route, many people will initially proceed through the intersection without stopping, as the sign is not part of their automatic process and is not heeded. 

This process also relates to the role of mental models and schemata. The model in Figure 4 can be used to visualize the relationship. Mental models of systems can be seen to exist as set (although slowly evolving) memory structures. Independently, individuals form a set of goals that relate to some system. These goals can be thought of as ideal states of the system that they wish to achieve. The same set of goals may exist frequently for a given system or may change often. Conversely,a set of goals may relate to more than one system model. A person’s current _ goal(s), selected as the most important among competing goals, will act to direct the selection of a mental model. The selected goals will also determine the frame (Casson, 1983), or focus, on the model that is adopted. 

## Goals 

SA is not generally thought of as a construct that exists solely for its own sake. SA is important as needed for decision making regarding some system or task. As such, it is integrally linked with both the context and the decisions for which the SA is being sought; it isfundamentally linked with a person's goals. Goals form the basis for most decision making in dynamic environments. Furthermore, more than one goal may be operating simultaneously, and these goals may sometimes conflict (e.g., “stay alive” and “kill enemies”). In most systems, people are not helpless recipients of data from the environment but are active seekers of data in light of their goals. 

Plans are then devised for reaching the goal using the projection capabilities of the model. A _ plan will be selected whose projected state best matches the goal state. When scripts are available for executing the selected plan, they will be employed (Schank and Abelson, 1977). When scripts are not available, actions will have to be devised to allow for plan completion. Again, the projection capabilities of the system model will be used to accomplish this. 

In what Casson (1983) has termed a top-down employed (Schank and Abelson, 1977). When decision process, a person’s goals and plans discripts are not available, actions will have to be rect which aspects of the environment are atdevised to allow for plan completion. Again, the tended to in the development of SA. That inforprojection capabilities of the system model will mation is then integrated and interpreted in be used to accomplish this. light of these goals to form Level 2 SA. The obAs an ongoing process, an individual observes servation of each of three parameters ofa system the current state of the environment, with his is not in itself meaningful. When integrated and or her attention directed to environmental feaviewed in the context of what they indicate tures by the goal-activated model and interabout the goal of operating the system ina given preted in light of it. The model that is active manner, however, they become meaningful. The _ provides a future projection of the status of key 

48-—March 1995 

HUMAN FACTORS 

**==> picture [311 x 359] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
MENTAL directs selection<br>_<br>ttt] —s«(IDEAL STATE)<br>MODEL f model 1 )<br>| LLbe} GOALS<br>directs change based<br>on situation model<br>match of plan<br>projectionsIs directs toselection desired ih (PROJECTED STATE)<br>goals dir PLANS<br>direct:<br>actionirects tmatch© existingisti ofdesired planscriptsipt  | (OUTCOME) |<br>actions devised SCRIPTS<br>through projection<br>when no scripts exist<br>a<br>directsand revision selectionof somocchens!acti on<br>system [model] projection<br>& expectations ACTIONS<br>(SITUATION MODEL)<br>SITUATION directsattention<br>features<br>perceptio<br>ENVIRONMENT<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 4. Relationship of goals and mental models to situation awareness. 

environmental features and expectations concerning future events. When these expectations match that which is observed, all is well. When they do not match because values of some parameter are different or an event occurs that should not, or an event does not occur that should, this signals to the individual that something is amiss and indicates a need to change goals or plans because of a shift in situation classes, a revision of the model, or selection of a new model. 

This process can also act to change current goal selection by altering the relative impor- 

tance of goals, as each goal can have antecedent rules governing situation classes in which each needs to be invoked over the others. When multiple goals are compatible with each other, several may be active at once. When goals are incompatible, their associated priority level for the identified situation class determines which shall be invoked. Similarly, plans may be altered or new plans selected if the feedback provided indicates that the plan is not achieving results in accordance with its projections, or when new goals require new plans. Through learning, these processes can also serve to create 

SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

March 1995—49 

better models, allowing for better projections in tion, and decision making. A threat assessment the future. model might include information as to what To give a detailed example of this process ina _ patterns of threats and threat movements conmilitary aircraft environment, a pilot may have _ stitute offensive versus defensive activities, for various goals, such as stay alive, kill enemy airexample. Future threat movements might be craft, and bomb a given target.g These &general predictable from the model based on current goals may have more specific subgoals, such as__ threat movements and known tactics. Approprinavi **g** ate to the target, avoid detection, avoid ate tactics for countering£egiven threat actions missiles, and employ missiles. The pilot would might also be resident in the form of scripts, choose between goals (and subgoals) based on simplifying decision making. their relative importance and the existing situation classification. Staying alive is a priority Summary goal, for example, which usually is active (exT : . . cept[in] .[ extreme][ kamikaze] .[circumstances).] .[ A][pi-] . ‘o summarize, the key. y featuresa ures of0 S.5A in this lot may alternate between the goals of bombing. model,. a person’s SA. is restricted by limited. atanys . tention and working memory capacity. Where a target and killing an enemy aircraft based on they have been developed, long-term memo the predetermined criticality of each goal’s sucstaves most likely in one form ‘ schemata ead cess to the current mission and the specifics of , y . : : : : mental models, can largely circumvent these the situation (which would convey the likeli|... was . . hood of each goal’s success) limits by providing for the integration and comThe current goal would indicate the model prehension of information and the projection of and frame to be active. A model for the goal of future events (the higher levels of SA), even on missile employment might direct attention tothe basis of incomplete information and under ward key environmental features, , such as dyuncertainty. The use of these models depends on . . we . attern matchi t iti in th namic relative positions of own and threat airPa hncnment aay cetween critical cuts ,"Sche. craft (location, altitude, airspeed, heading, flight F . . path), and current weapon selection, including mata of prototypical situations may also be asweapon envelope and capabilities, , current probsociated with scripts to produce single-step reaye : ability of kill, and rate of change of probabilityas trievalaffectedbof actions. son'sfrom memory.ele andSA. :i freely of kill. If this model was active, the pilot would : . y P & ; “P © 0 be inclined to seek out and process those key which will influence how attention is directed, . how information i ived it elements of the environment. Use of the resultte voteA this ton aaa ved, and’ hows .is iinant situation model (SA), in conjunction with atin tandem Nuh bottean u on ina the missile employment model, would allow the . . . uP P sing pilot to determine how best to employ the airwhich salient cues will activate appropriate craft relativef to the enemy aircraftP and missilevs 8oals and models.. d In additi. t **on** , automatt **ici** ty may launch timing (plans and actions) be useful in overcoming attention limits; howWhile carrying out this goal, , the pilot willalso °° it may leave the individual susceptible to was be alert to critical features that mightSenerindicate missingfect iN novel° stimuli, that canan negativelyi afthat a new model should be activated. If the pi, lot detected a new threat, for example, the actiTASK AND SYSTEM FACTORS vated goals might change so that the pilot would cease to operate on the missile employment A number of task and system factors can also model, and a threat assessment model would be __ be postulated to influence an individual's ability activated consistent with that goal. The model to achieve SA. Althougha full list of these factors selected, if detailed enough, would be used to has yet to be determined, a few major issues direct situation comprehension, future projecwould seem apparent. 

## 50—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

System Design the needed information from the environment. ; ; Figure The second major issue involves the display inson 5 shows the sequence by which a Perterface for providing that information to the gains access to information from the envioperator. ronment (Endsley, 1990a). Some information may be acquired directly. In many domains of Interface Design interest, however, an intervening system senses . a. ae . information and presents it to a human operaThe way in which information is presented via tor. In this process, transmission error, defined the operator interface will largely influence SA as a loss of information, can occur at each by determining how much information can be transition acquired, how accurately it can be acquired, and First of all, the system may not acquire all of to what degree it is compatible with the operathe needed information (e,). Most aircraft systor's SA needs. Hence, “ has hecome a topic of tems, for example, even those with the latest ra- 8 Concern in many human actors esign ef dar, do not provide complete tracks on all airforts. In general, one seeks designs that will craft. Nor do they provide everything the pilot transmit needed information to the operator would like to know about those aircraft that are without undue cognitive effort. In this light, detected. Similarly, most systems will acquire mental workload has been a consideration in deonly certain information, based on the designsign efforts for some time. At the same time, the er’s understanding of what is required and techlevel of SA provided (the outcome of that pronological limitations cess) needs to be considered. Of the information acquired by the system, Determining specific design guidelines for imnot all of it may be displayed to the operator PToving operator SA through the interface is the (e2). This may be because the interface is either crauenge reeling wtent oe teat research mors. not set up to display certain information or only Vera! genera inte ace Teatures can be hysubsets can be displayed at any one time. Frepothesized to be important for SA, based on the quently, the operator can determine to a certain model presented here. degree which subset of data is displayed (and 1. As attention and working memory are limited, also in some systems in which data are acthe degree to which displays provide information quired).; Finally,i of the information; : displayed; by that is processedo and integrated: inin terms of Level the . . 2 and 3 SA requirements will positively affect SA. system and that directly acquirable from the For instance, directly portraying the amount of environment, there may be incomplete or inactime and distance available on the fuel remaining curate transmission to the human operator (e; in an aircraft would be preferable to requiring and f | . d the pilot to calculate this information based on e,) because of perceptual, attention, an lower-level data (e.g., fuel, speed, altitude, etc.). working memory constraints, as discussed 2. The degree to which information is presented in earlier terms of the operator’s major goals will positively Th fi t Li infl ing SA. th affect SA. Many systems provide information that fore, e first external issue intluencing SA, thereis technology oriented—based on physical system is the degree to which the system acquires parameters and measurements (e.g., oil pressure 

**==> picture [277 x 85] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
e4<br>Real System Interface<br>World Knowledge Knowledge<br>Figure 5. Situation awareness inputs (adapted from Endsley, 1990a).<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


7 

## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—51 

- or temperature). To improve SA, this information that support parallel processing of information needs to be SA oriented. That is, it should be orshould directly benefit SA. For example, the adganized so that the information needed for a pardition of voice synthesis or three-dimensional auticular goal is colocated and directly answers the dio cues to the visually overloaded cockpit is premajor decisions associated with the goal. For exdicted to be beneficial on this basis. ample, for the goal of weapons employment, fac. tors such as opening/closing velocity, weapon seThese recommendations may not appear that lecttargrelevant **e** td selected,and elementsfiringand thatenvelope,time shouldto em **p** berobabilityloyment presentedwouldof ‘kill,in anbe radicallypoused, at different least singu: fromlarly, those elsewhere. that have been Thisos is be- esintegrated form for this goal. cause the SA theory described here rests on var- 

- 3. Considering that mental models and schemata jous information-processing constructs that hieigher hypothesizedlevels of SAto inbecomplexkey toolssystems,for achievingthe criti-the jaye been discussed for some: years. The value: cal cues used for activating these mechanisms added by the SA concept is as a means of inteneed to be determined and made salient in the grating these constructs in terms of the operainterface design. In particular those cues that will toys overall goals and decision behavior. As indicate the presence of prototypical situations ; , . will be of prime importance. Kaplan and Simon _ such, this provides several advantages in the de(1990) found decision making is facilitated if the sign process. critical attributes are perceptually salient. 

- 4. Designs need to take into consideration both top1. The integrated focus of SA provides a means of down and bottom-up processing. In this light, endesigning for dynamic, goal-oriented behavior, vironmental cues with highly salient features will with its constant shifting of goals. Traditional detend to capture attention away from current goalsign approaches (Meister, 1971) have focused on directed processing. Salient design features, such task analysis, which works fairly well for fixed, as those indicated by Treisman and Paterson sequential tasks but does not provide the mecha(1984), should be reserved for critical cues that nisms or flexibility necessary for dealing with dyindicate the need for activating other goals and namic tasks and fluctuating goals. By focusing at should be avoided for noncritical events. the level of operator goals, the degree to which 

- 5. A major problem for SA occurs when attention is multiple goals may be operating simultaneously directed to a subset of information and other imcan be considered and the precursors to goal acportant elements are not attended to, either intentivation represented. Thus a more compatible tionally or unintentionally (Endsley and Bolstad, representation of operator behavior can be gener1993). It is hypothesized that designs that restrict ated for creating “‘user-centered’’ designs. access to SA elements (via information filtering, 2.It provides a means of moving from a focus on for instance) will contribute to this problem. A providing operators with data to providing operpreferred design will provide global SA—an overators with information. When focusing on data, view of the situation across operator goals—at all all of the integration, comprehension, and projectimes, while providing the operator with detailed tion is still up to the operator. When focusing on information related to his or her immediate goals, information, the design focus is on presenting as required. Global SA is hypothesized to be imwhat the operator really needs to know in the forportant for determining current goals and for enmat it is needed in, thus allowing the operator to abling projection of future events. achieve more SA at a given level of workload. By 

- 6. Although filtering out information on relevant SA presenting the Level 1, 2, and 3 SA requirements elements is hypothesized to be detrimental, the associated with each goal or subgoal, this can be problem of information overload in many systems accomplished. must still be considered. The filtering of extrane3.It provides a means of incorporating into the deous information (not related to SA needs) and resign a consideration of the interplay of elements, duction of data (by processing and integrating wherein more attention to some elements may low-level data to arrive at SA requirements) come at the expense of others. Many design guideshould be beneficial to SA. lines are at the level of the specific component 

- 7. One One of the most difficult and taxing parts of SA SA is (e.g., a dial or audio signal’s characteristics). Yet the projection of future future states of the system. This the real challenge in designing systems arises is hypothesized to require require a fairly well developed when the components must be integrated. The SA mental model. System-generated support for proprovided to the operator as a result of the combijecting future events and states of the system nation of system components becomes the goal of should directly benefit directly benefit benefit Level 3 SA, particularly particularly for the integration process. 

7. One One of the most difficult and taxing parts of SA SA is the projection of future future states of the system. This is hypothesized to require require a fairly well developed mental model. System-generated support for projecting future events and states of the system should directly benefit directly benefit benefit Level 3 SA, particularly particularly for less-experienced operators. 

   4. Perhaps most important, this integrated level of focus provides a means for assessing the efficacy of a particular design concept that an examination of underlying constructs (attention, working 

- 8.The ability to share attention between multiple tasks and sources of information will be very important in any complex system. System designs 

## 52—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

memory, etc.) does not provide. As an integrated Eysenck, 1982; Hockey, 1970). Under perceived system, the degree to which a particular design danger, a decrease in attention has been obprovides SA (as a resultant state) can be deter: . ; ; mined after all these other factors, with their asServed for peripheral information (i.e., those associated trade-offs and interactions, have come _ pects that attract less attentional focus; Bacon, into play. 1974; Weltman, Smith, and Egstrom, 1971). number of possible possible display formats, techBroadbent (1971) found that there was an inand design concepts that have been or creased tendency to sample dominant or probabe contemplated for improving SA are too ble sources of information under stress. Sherito mention. A few major design isdan (1981) has termed this effect cognitive tunnel however, pose a serious enough challenge vision. across numerous systems to warrant speThis is a critical problem for SA, leading to the consideration: stress, workload, complexity, workload, complexity, complexity, neglect of certain elements in favor of others. In automation. many cases, such as in emergency conditions, it is those factors outside the operator’s perceived central task that prove to be lethal. A United. types of stress factors exist that may Airlines DC-8 crashed in Portland, Oregon, in influence SA, including (a) physical physical stress1978 when when it ran out of fuel. It was reported that ran out of fuel. It was reported that out of fuel. It was reported that of fuel. It was reported that fuel. It was reported that It was reported that was reported that reported that that vibration, heat/cold, lighting, atmothe captain, preoccupied with a landing gear conditions, drugs, boredom or fatigue, problem, neglected to keep track of fuel usage cyclical changes; and (b) social psychologi(National Transportation Safety Board, 1979). stressors—fear or anxiety, uncertainty, imMany similar incidents of attentional narrowing similar incidents of attentional narrowing of attentional narrowing narrowing or consequences of events, aspects of can be found. 

The number of possible possible display formats, technologies, and design concepts that have been or may be contemplated for improving SA are too numerous to mention. A few major design issues, however, pose a serious enough challenge to SA across numerous systems to warrant special consideration: stress, workload, complexity, workload, complexity, complexity, and automation. S tress 

Several types of stress factors exist that may Airlines DC-8 crashed in Portland, Oregon, in act to influence SA, including (a) physical physical stress1978 when when it ran out of fuel. It was reported that ran out of fuel. It was reported that out of fuel. It was reported that of fuel. It was reported that fuel. It was reported that It was reported that was reported that reported that that ors—noise, vibration, heat/cold, lighting, atmothe captain, preoccupied with a landing gear spheric conditions, drugs, boredom or fatigue, problem, neglected to keep track of fuel usage and cyclical changes; and (b) social psychologi(National Transportation Safety Board, 1979). cal stressors—fear or anxiety, uncertainty, imMany similar incidents of attentional narrowing similar incidents of attentional narrowing of attentional narrowing narrowing portance or consequences of events, aspects of can be found. task affecting monetary gain, self-esteem, presPremature closure, arriving at a decision tige, job advancement or loss, mental load, and _ without without exploring all information information available, has has time pressure (Hockey, 1986; Sharit and Salvalso been found to be more likely under stress endy, 1982). (Janis, 1982; Keinan, 1987; Keinan and Fried- 

Premature closure, arriving at a decision _ without without exploring all information information available, has has also been found to be more likely under stress (Janis, 1982; Keinan, 1987; Keinan and Friedland, 1987). This includes considering less information (Janis, 1982; Wright, 1974) and attending more to negative information (Wright, more to negative information (Wright, to negative information (Wright, negative information (Wright, information (Wright, (Wright, 1974). Several authors have found that scanning of stimuli under stress is scattered and poorly organized (Keinan, 1987; Keinan and Friedland, 1987; Wachtel, 1967). 

Mandler (1982) stated that these stressors ‘are land, 1987). This includes considering less inforeffective to the extent that they are perceived as mation (Janis, 1982; Wright, 1974) and attenddangerous or threatening” (p. 91). That is, they ing more to negative information (Wright, more to negative information (Wright, to negative information (Wright, negative information (Wright, information (Wright, (Wright, 1974). are stressors only if the person perceives them as Several authors have found that scanning of being stressing. A large interpretive component stimuli under stress is scattered and poorly orexists in the process. A certain amount of stress ganized (Keinan, 1987; Keinan and Friedland, may actually improve performance by increas1987; Wachtel, 1967). ing attention to important aspects of the situaComplex tasks with multiple with multiple multiple input sources ap- sources ap- aption. A higher amount of stress can have ex- _ pear to be be particularly sensitive to the effects of tremely negative consequences, however, as __ stressors (Broadbent, 1954; Jerison, 1957, 1959). accompanying increases in autonomic functionWoodhead (1964) found found that performance performance decreing and aspects of the stressors can act to dements that occurred during intermittent noise manda portion of a person’s limited attentional stress took place during the information input capacity (Hockey, 1986). stage. It would seem, then, that stress signifi- 

Complex tasks with multiple with multiple multiple input sources ap- sources ap- appear to be be particularly sensitive to the effects of stressors (Broadbent, 1954; Jerison, 1957, 1959). Woodhead (1964) found found that performance performance decrements that occurred during intermittent noise stress took place during the information input stage. It would seem, then, that stress significantly affects the early stage of the decisionmaking process that is involved in the assessment of the situation. It is expected that stress will significantly influence SA on on this basis, beginning with the initial perception of environmental elements (Level 1). 

Stressors can affect SA in a number of differcantly affects the early stage of the decisionent ways. The first, and probably most widemaking process that is involved in the assessspread, finding is that under various forms of ment of the situation. It is expected that stress stress, people tend to narrow their field of atten- _will significantly influence SA on on this basis, betion to include only a limited number of central ginning with the initial perception of environaspects (Bacon, 1974; Baddeley, 1972; Bartlett, mental elements (Level 1). 1943; Callaway and Dembo, 1958; Davis, 1948; A second way in which stress may affect SA is 

| SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

March 1995-53 

through decrements in working memory capacworking hard but is successful in achieving an ity and retrieval (Hockey, 1986). Wickens, accurate and complete picture of the situation. Stokes, Barnett, and Hyman (1988) found that Thus SA and workload are hypothesized to dioptimality of performance was negatively afverge because of characteristics of the system fected by stress only on decision tasks with a design, tasks, and the individual operator. If the high spatial component, however, and not on Operator is exerting effort at attaining SA and if those with purely a high working memory or the demands associated with this task and othlong-term memory component. ers exceed the operator’s limited capacity, only The degree to which working memory decrethen will a decrement in SA be expected. ments will affect SA depends on the FeSOUrces Complexity available to the individual operator. In tasks in which achieving SA involves a high working A major factor creating a challenge for operamemory load, a significant impact on SA Levels tor SA is the increasing complexity of many sys2 and 3 would also be expected. In the Vincennes tems. System complexity is hypothesized to negincident, the systems operators had to rely on atively affect both operator workload and SA working memory to calculate whether an inthrough factors such as an increase in the numcoming aircraft was ascending or descending. ber of system components, the degree of interTheir error in believing the incoming aircraft action between these components, and the dywas descending could have been associated with namics or rate of change of the components. In reduced working memory capacity in a stressful addition, the complexity of the operator’s tasks combat environment. If long-term memory may increase through the number of goals, stores are available to support SA, less effect tasks, and decisions to be made in regard to the will be expected. system. Each of these factors will increase the amount Workload of mental workload required to achieve a given level of SA. When that demand exceeds human In many dynamic many dynamic dynamic systems, high mental work- workcapabilities, SA will suffer. This complexity may load is a stressor of particular importance, S© be somewhat moderated by the degree to which much so that at least one one major approach approach to SA the operator has a well-developed internal repmeasurement combines combines workload features (supresentation of the system to aid in directing atply and demand of operator operator resources) with intention, integrating data, and developing the formation features (Taylor, 1989). Endsley higher levels of SA, as these mechanisms may be (1993a), however, demonstrated independence effective for coping with complexity. 

In many dynamic many dynamic dynamic systems, high mental work- workload is a stressor of particular importance, S© much so that at least one one major approach approach to SA measurement combines combines workload features (supply and demand of operator operator resources) with information features (Taylor, 1989). Endsley (1993a), however, demonstrated independence between these two constructs across a wide range of values. That is, the following may exist: 

## Automation 

A lack of SA has been hypothesized to underlie (1) Low SA with low workload: The operator may have little idea of what is going on and is not the out-of-the-loop performance decrement that actively working to find out because of inattencan accompany automation (Carmody and information and number of tasks are too great, 1992b). System operators working with automaSA may suffer because the operator can attend _ tion have been found to have a diminished abilor incomplete perception and integration of form tasks manually in the face of automation (3) information. failures as compared with manual performance High SA with low workload: The required inforon the same tasks (Billings, 1991; Moray, 1986; mation can be presented in a manner that is easy . . to process (an ideal state). Wickens, 1992a; Wiener and Curry, 1980). Al(4) High SA with high workload: The operator is though some of this problem may result from a 

## 54—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

loss of manual skills under automation, SA is erator has poor SA, thus increasing the probaalso a critical component. bility of undesirable performance. Errors in SA Operators who have lost SA may be slower to can be discussed in terms of the presented detect problems and also will require extra time model. It is not the intention here to discuss all to reorient themselves to relevant system patypes of human error, for which several taxonorameters in order to proceed with problem dimies exist (Norman, 1983; Rasmussen, 1986; agnosis and assumption of manual performance Reason, 1987) but, rather, to investigate the facwhen automation fails. This has been hypothetors that can lead to breakdowns in the SA porsized to occur for a number of reasons: (a) aloss tion of the decision-making process. These of vigilance and increase in complacency assobreakdowns can occur from either incomplete ciated with the assumption of a monitoring role SA—knowledge of only some of the elements— under automation, (b) the difference between or inaccurate SA—erroneous knowledge conbeing an active processor of informationin mancerning the value of some elements. The discusual processing and a passive recipient of inforsion will be separated into those factors mation under automation, and (c) a loss of or affecting SA at each of its three levels. change in the type of feedback provided to opLevel 1 SA. At the very lowest level, a person erators concerning the state of the system under may simply fail to perceive certain information automation (Endsley and Kiris, in press). In _ that is important for SA in the assigned task (intheir study, Endsley and Kiris found evidence complete SA). In the simplest case, this may refor an SA decrement accompanying automation sult from a lack of detectability or discriminaof a cognitive task that was greater under full _ bility of the physical characteristics of the signal automation than it was under various levels of _ in question, from some physical obstruction prepartial automation. Lower SA in the automated venting perception (visual barrier, auditory conditions corresponded to a demonstrated outmasking, etc.), or from a failure of the system of-the-loop performance decrement, supporting design to make the information available to the the hypothesized relationship between SA and _ operator. Accurate, reliable weather informaautomation. tion for aircrew is frequently lacking, for inSA may not suffer under all forms of automa- automastance. The crew of a Northwest Airlines DC-9 tion, however. Wiener (1993) (1993) and Billings (1991) attempted to take off from from Detroit unaware unaware that have stated that SA may be improved by sys- _ the aircraft flaps were retracted, leading to the tems that provide integrated information death of 154 people (National Transportation through automation. In commercial cockpits, Safety Board, 1988). A partial reason cited for Hansman et al. (1992) found that automated _ this lack of knowledge of knowledge knowledge was the failure of a a takeflight management system input was superior to management system input was superior to system input was superior to input was superior to was superior to superior to to _ off warning system to alert the crew to the prob- off warning system to alert the crew to the prob- warning system to alert the crew to the prob- system to alert the crew to the prob- to alert the crew to the prob- alert the crew to the prob- the crew to the prob- crew to the prob- to the prob- the prob- probmanual data entry, producing better error delem with the flaps. (In addition, the crew failed tection on clearance updates. Automation that to fully execute a checklist, thus they did not reduces unnecessary manual work and data indirectly check the flaps themselves.) 

SA may not suffer under all forms of automa- automastance. The crew of a Northwest Airlines DC-9 tion, however. Wiener (1993) (1993) and Billings (1991) attempted to take off from from Detroit unaware unaware that have stated that SA may be improved by sys- _ the aircraft flaps were retracted, leading to the tems that provide integrated information death of 154 people (National Transportation through automation. In commercial cockpits, Safety Board, 1988). A partial reason cited for Hansman et al. (1992) found that automated _ this lack of knowledge of knowledge knowledge was the failure of a a takeflight management system input was superior to management system input was superior to system input was superior to input was superior to was superior to superior to to _ off warning system to alert the crew to the prob- off warning system to alert the crew to the prob- warning system to alert the crew to the prob- system to alert the crew to the prob- to alert the crew to the prob- alert the crew to the prob- the crew to the prob- crew to the prob- to the prob- the prob- probmanual data entry, producing better error delem with the flaps. (In addition, the crew failed tection on clearance updates. Automation that to fully execute a checklist, thus they did not reduces unnecessary manual work and data indirectly check the flaps themselves.) tegration required to achieve SA may provide In extreme cases, the only cue a person will benefits to both workload and SA. The exact have regarding the presence of certain informaconditions under which SA will be positively or _ tion will coincide with the occurrence of an an ernegatively affected by automation need to be ror. Rasmussen (1986) gave the example of a determined. person not realizing that it is icy until he or she 

In extreme cases, the only cue a person will have regarding the presence of certain information will coincide with the occurrence of an an error. Rasmussen (1986) gave the example of a person not realizing that it is icy until he or she slips. In this case, the condition could be discerned only in conjunction with the error and not sufficiently in advance to allow for behavior behavior modification to prevent the error. In other cases, prevent the error. In other cases, the error. In other cases, error. In other cases, In other cases, other cases, cases, 

ERRORS IN SA cerned only in conjunction with the error and not sufficiently in advance to allow for behavior behavior From an operational point of view, there is modification to prevent the error. In other cases, prevent the error. In other cases, the error. In other cases, error. In other cases, In other cases, other cases, cases, major concern about situations in which the op- _ because of luck, no error may result from the 

## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—55 

lack of SA; however, the potential for error would rise significantly. 

brought on by stress or heavy workload can lead to a lack of SA on all but the factor at hand. In 1972 an L-1011 commercial airliner went down in the Florida Everglades the Florida Everglades Florida Everglades Everglades because all of the crew of the crew the crew crew members were were so focused on a problem with focused on a problem with on a problem with a problem with problem with with the nose gear indicator that they failed to notice that the aircraft was descending. Ninety-nine lives were lost (National Transportation Safety Board, 1973). A A major problem problem with attentional narrowing is that often a person will be sure he or she is attending to the most important information, but there is no way way to know whether or know whether or whether or or not that assumption is valid without having some idea of the value of the other elements. In other cases, the normal sampling strategy has merely been interrupted and not reactivated ina been interrupted and not reactivated ina interrupted and not reactivated ina and not reactivated ina not reactivated ina reactivated ina ina timely manner. In either case, attentional narrowing can lead to serious errors in SA. 

In many cases in which SA is incomplete, the 1972 an L-1011 commercial airliner went down relevant signals or cues are readily discernible in the Florida Everglades the Florida Everglades Florida Everglades Everglades because all of the crew of the crew the crew crew but not properly perceived by the subject. The members were were so focused on a problem with focused on a problem with on a problem with a problem with problem with with the failure of the Northwest Airlines crew to manunose gear indicator that they failed to notice ally check flap status would fall into this catethat the aircraft was descending. Ninety-nine gory. There can be several underlying causes for lives were lost (National Transportation Safety not perceiving available information. Many Board, 1973). A A major problem problem with attentional complex environments present an overabunnarrowing is that often a person will be sure he dance of information. Data sampling should or she is attending to the most important informaintain a fair degree of accuracy on each of the mation, but there is no way way to know whether or know whether or whether or or relevant variables (Wickens, 1992a), in which not that assumption is valid without having case errors in SA would be small (determined by some idea of the value of the other elements. In the amount of change in each variable between other cases, the normal sampling strategy has successive samples) and distributed across the merely been interrupted and not reactivated ina been interrupted and not reactivated ina interrupted and not reactivated ina and not reactivated ina not reactivated ina reactivated ina ina various variables of concern. Failures in infortimely manner. In either case, attentional narmation sampling are commonplace, however, rowing can lead to serious errors in SA. and may result from the lack of an adequate Inaccurate SA—the belief that the value of strategy or internal model for directing samsome variable is different from what what it actually pling. Wickens (1992a) has also noted that hu_is—can also occur. In relation to Level occur. In relation to Level In relation to Level relation to Level to Level Level 1 SA, this mans have several general failings in sampling, would occur through occur through through the misperception of a a sigincluding misperception of the statistical propnal—for instance, seeing a blue light as green erties of elements in the environment and limi- _ because of ambient of ambient ambient lighting or seeing a or seeing a seeing a a 3 as an 8 an 8 8 tations of human memory (forgetting what has_ on a dial. Exemplifying this problem is the inalready been sampled). The phenomenon of vistance in which a Boeing 737 hit power lines sual dominance can act as a further limit; audinear Kansas City, Missouri, because the pilot tory information is less likely to be processed in misidentified lights north of the runway as the some situations (Posner, Nissen, and Klein, runway approach lights (National Transporta1976). tion Safety Board, 1990). Erroneous expecta- 

Inaccurate SA—the belief that the value of some variable is different from what what it actually _is—can also occur. In relation to Level occur. In relation to Level In relation to Level relation to Level to Level Level 1 SA, this would occur through occur through through the misperception of a a signal—for instance, seeing a blue light as green because of ambient of ambient ambient lighting or seeing a or seeing a seeing a a 3 as an 8 an 8 8 on a dial. Exemplifying this problem is the instance in which a Boeing 737 hit power lines near Kansas City, Missouri, because the pilot misidentified lights north of the runway as the runway approach lights (National Transportation Safety Board, 1990). Erroneous expectations can be a major contributor to these misperceptions. 

Furthermore, some people appear to be better tions can be a major contributor to these than others at dividing their attention across misperceptions. different tasks (Damos and Wickens, 1980). MarLevel 2 SA. SA errors are most often the result tin and Jones (1984) have found cognitive errors _ of an inability to properly integrate or compreto be significantly correlated with capabilities hend the meaning of perceived data in light of in distributing attention across tasks. So, aloperator goals. Orasanu, Dismukes, and Fischer though environmental sampling can be an ef(1993) described five National Transportation fective means of coping with excessive SA Safety Board (NTSB) aircraft accident reports. demands, human limitations in sampling, attenIn all five cases, sufficient environmental cues tion, and attention sharing can lead to signifi| were present, but the aircrew did not determine cant Level 1 SA errors. their relevance to important goals. This problem is compounded by the addition This misreading of cues can occur for several of stress, which can affect the information input _ reasons. A novice will not have the mental modstage through premature closure, changes in els necessary for properly comprehending and factors attended to, and deterioration of the integrating all of the incoming data or for deterscanning process. The narrowing of attention mining which cues are actually relevant to 

## 56—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

established goals. Fischer, Orasanu, and MonEven when a a person has selected the correct talvo (1993) found that less-effective crews model with which which to interpret and integrate enlacked sensitivity to contextual factors, indicatvironmental stimuli, errors can occur. Certain ing a failure to recognize prototypical situapieces of data may be mismatched with the tions. In the absence of a good internal model, model or not matched at all, resulting in a failone must accept low SA and thus be comproure to recognize a prototypical situation (Klein, mised in decision making, develop a new model, 1989b; Manktelow and Jones, 1987). The NTSB or adapt an existing model to the task at hand. (1981) noted that several aircraft conflicts were SA errors will exist in the form of inaccurate or _ related to the fact that air traffic controllers reincomplete Level 2 SA when the adapted or ceived the same aural signal for both conflict newly developed model fails to match the new alerts and low-altitude warnings. In this case, environment. inadequate perceptual salience of the signals In other cases, a person may incorrectly select probably prevented an immediate correct the wrong model from memory, based ona submatch of cue cue to model. set of situational situational cues, and use this model to inIn addition, SA errors could occur from overterpret all perceived data. Mosier and Chidester relying on the default values embedded in a (1991) found evidence that aircrews made “‘recmodel (Manktelow and Jones, 1987). In general, ognitional, almost reflexive judgments, based when new situations are encountered in which upon a a few, critical items of information; and the known default values are not appropriate, then spent additional time and effort verifying the model model is modified modified to include include the new new class of of its correctness through continued situational insituations. Before this occurs, occurs, or if cues cues received vestigation.’’ This strategy can be effective. have not flagged the specific situation type, sigMosier and Chidester found that the bestnificant SA errors can occur by incorrectly asperforming crews obtained a substantial portion crews obtained a substantial portion obtained a substantial portion a substantial portion substantial portion portion suming defaults for some variables. The newly of their information after making a decision. developed French Airbus 320 crashed during a However, if the wrong mental model is inilow flyover demonstration in 1988. The inquiry tially selected, based on a subset of cues, a repnoted that the pilot may not have been aderesentational error may may occur. These errors can quately aware of effects on handling perforbe particularly troublesome, as pointed out by mance when when flying near the angle-of-attack limCarmino, Idee, Larchier Boulanger, and Morlat _ its of the the aircraft and may may have been relying on on (1988). They noted that realizing that the wrong wrong the much-advertised envelope protection demodel is active can be very active can be very can be very be very very difficult because new because new new signed into the new aircraft (Ministry of Plandata are interpreted in light of the the model. Diffining, Housing, Transport and Maritime Affairs, culties in recognizing recognizing the error may alsobecom- may alsobecom- alsobecom1989). In terms of this paper, this paper, paper, a refined model refined model model for pounded by confirmation bias (Fracker, 1988). the specific aircraft capabilities had not yet been had not yet been not yet been yet been been Thus data that should indicate one thing are developed, and the pilot had pilot had had to rely on on a general general taken to mean something quite different based understanding of envelope envelope protection. on the incorrect model. When no model exists at all, Level 2 SA must 

Even when a a person has selected the correct model with which which to interpret and integrate environmental stimuli, errors can occur. Certain pieces of data may be mismatched with the model or not matched at all, resulting in a failure to recognize a prototypical situation (Klein, 1989b; Manktelow and Jones, 1987). The NTSB (1981) noted that several aircraft conflicts were related to the fact that air traffic controllers received the same aural signal for both conflict alerts and low-altitude warnings. In this case, inadequate perceptual salience of the signals probably prevented an immediate correct match of cue cue to model. 

set of situational situational cues, and use this model to inIn addition, SA errors could occur from overterpret all perceived data. Mosier and Chidester relying on the default values embedded in a (1991) found evidence that aircrews made “‘recmodel (Manktelow and Jones, 1987). In general, ognitional, almost reflexive judgments, based when new situations are encountered in which upon a a few, critical items of information; and the known default values are not appropriate, then spent additional time and effort verifying the model model is modified modified to include include the new new class of of its correctness through continued situational insituations. Before this occurs, occurs, or if cues cues received vestigation.’’ This strategy can be effective. have not flagged the specific situation type, sigMosier and Chidester found that the bestnificant SA errors can occur by incorrectly asperforming crews obtained a substantial portion crews obtained a substantial portion obtained a substantial portion a substantial portion substantial portion portion suming defaults for some variables. The newly of their information after making a decision. developed French Airbus 320 crashed during a However, if the wrong mental model is inilow flyover demonstration in 1988. The inquiry tially selected, based on a subset of cues, a repnoted that the pilot may not have been aderesentational error may may occur. These errors can quately aware of effects on handling perforbe particularly troublesome, as pointed out by mance when when flying near the angle-of-attack limCarmino, Idee, Larchier Boulanger, and Morlat _ its of the the aircraft and may may have been relying on on (1988). They noted that realizing that the wrong wrong the much-advertised envelope protection demodel is active can be very active can be very can be very be very very difficult because new because new new signed into the new aircraft (Ministry of Plandata are interpreted in light of the the model. Diffining, Housing, Transport and Maritime Affairs, culties in recognizing recognizing the error may alsobecom- may alsobecom- alsobecom1989). In terms of this paper, this paper, paper, a refined model refined model model for pounded by confirmation bias (Fracker, 1988). the specific aircraft capabilities had not yet been had not yet been not yet been yet been been Thus data that should indicate one thing are developed, and the pilot had pilot had had to rely on on a general general taken to mean something quite different based understanding of envelope envelope protection. on the incorrect model. When no model exists at all, Level 2 SA must Klein (1993) reported on errors in medical debe developed in working memory. An inability cision making in which successive symptoms to perform this integration in an accurate, continued to be interpreted into an existing ditimely manner—resulting from insufficient agnosis even though they clearly pointed to a knowledge or working memory limitations, pardifferent diagnosis. Fracker also pointed out ticularly under stress—can also lead to inaccuthat an incorrect model may be selected initially rate or incomplete SA. because of representativeness and availability Level 3 SA. Finally, Level 3 SA may be lackbiases. ing or incorrect. Even if a situation is clearly 

## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—57 

understood, it may be difficult to accurately project future dynamics without a highly developed mental model. Klein (1989b) has noted that some people simply are not good at mental simulation. Lack of a good model and attention and memory limitations would account for this. Simmel and Shelton (1987) described the problems pilots have in determining potential consequences of assessed situations. Amalberti and Deblon (1992) and MacMillian, Entin, and Serfaty (1993) noted, however, that experts frequently determine possible future occurrences in order to plan ahead. 

new, nonhabitual goal is suppressed, and seeing the store sign does not conjure the associated goal of stopping. While the habitual schema is operating, the person either is not receptive to the nonhabitual cues or does not generate the appropriate higher-level SA from the perception of the cues because the appropriate schema is suppressed. Detection of SA errors. A real issue concerns how people know when their SA is in error. Very often they may be completely unaware of how much they do not know or of the inaccuracy of ‘their internal representation of the situation. The main clue to erroneous SA will occur when a person perceives some new piece of data that does not not fit with expectations based on his or her internal model.When a person’s expectations do not match with what is perceived, this conflict can be resolved by adopting a new model, revising the existing model, or changing one’s goals and plans to accommodate the new situation classification (Manktelow and Jones, 1987). The inappropriate choice could easily sabotage SA efforts for some time. 

General factors. A few general underlying facThe main tors may also lead to SA errors at all three levels. a person Martin and Jones (1984) pointed out that people does not not who have trouble with distributed attention may be having trouble in maintaining multiple not match goals. This could lead to considerable SA probcan be lems in complex systems, in which the ability to ing the juggle goals on the basis of incoming informaand plans to tion is a necessity. An inability to keep multiple _ classification goals in mind could seriously degrade an operinappropriate ator’s receptivity to highly pertinent data reefforts for lated to the neglected goal, leading to significant If the new errors. model, this may merely indicate A second major type of error affecting SA re- _ totypical totypical lates to the role of habitual schemata (or autothat calls up maticity). In the normal course of events, habitingly. If the ual schemata will be automatically activated existing based on the presence of environmental cues. common While the schema is active, environmental cues vise the will be processed in a predetermined manner. data or When a change needs to be made, however, appropriate. problems can occur. A person leaving work and about the getting into the car may automatically embark _ tion is present. is present. present. Without on the ‘‘drive home” schema. If on a particular _ persist in a day the person wishes to stop at the store, he or data continue continue she must change or interrupt the schema. Often, wrong model. however, the person arrives home to realize the existing desired detour was completely forgotten. new model model Although this has been termed a slip of action cur while a (Reason, 1984), it can also be shown to be Telated to SA. Under normal circumstances, environmental cues (the store sign) will be processed This paper in light of current goals (stop at the store). While | various mechanisms and factors hypothesized to habitual schemata are operating, however, the be important 

If the new data can be incorporated into the model, this may merely indicate that a new pro_ totypical totypical situation (state of the model) is present that calls up different goals and plans accordingly. If the new data cannot easily fit into the existing model, the model may be revised. A common problem is whether to continue to revise the existing model to account for the new data or choose an alternate model that is more appropriate. For the latter to occur, something about the data must flag that a different situa_ tion is present. is present. present. Without this flag, the person may _ persist in a representational error whereby the data continue continue to be misinterpreted in light of the wrong model. Of course, if the inadequacy of the existing model is recognized but no appropriate new model model exists, significant errors may still occur while a new model is being developed. 

CONCLUSIONS This paper presents a model of SA, including | various mechanisms and factors hypothesized to be important for its generation. Based on this 

## 58—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

- model, a taxonomy of SA errors was generated. 1. The degree to which relevant features of the enviThe model also presents a means of conducting ronment are available to the operator either difuture rectly or through the system's displays fundamenresearch on SA. tally affects a person's ability to achieve SA. . 2. The way in which information is presented via the 

- Theoretical Hypotheses operator interface will affect a person’s ability to temsSeveral characteristics. of individualssoe and sysachieveitively impactSA. Specific features SA include: hypothesizedintegrated andtocoal.posaffecthavea person’sbeen abilitypresentedto acquirethat are andbelieved maintainto orientedcritical cues,information support forpresentation, parallel processingsalienceof in-of SA. ; ‘ ; formation, elimination of unneeded information In terms of information-processing mechaand reduction in salience of noncritical informa- 

- nisms available to individuals, the following key tion, presentation of global information across features affecting SA are hypothesized: goals and detailed information on current goals, , and system support for projection of future events 

- 1. The way in which attention is directed across and states. . available information is critical to achieving SA 3. Although small amounts of stress may improve (particularly in dynamic and complex systems in SA through anincrease in arousal and attention, which attention is overloaded). excess stress will negatively affect SA through dis- 

- 2.In the absence of long-term memory structures, ruptions in acquiring information and, in some SA will be constrained by the limitations of attencases, through reductions in working memory tion and working memory. capacity. ; 

- 3. Schemata and mental models are presented as 4.SA and workload are hypothesized to be essenceptionmechanisms for (a) directing attention in the pertially independent acrossa wide range of these ing process, (b) providing a meansofintegratconstructs. Only under high levels of perceived and (c)and projectingcomprehendingthe futureperceivedstates ofinformation, the environ5. Increasesworkload willin perceived decrementssystemin SAcomplexity be expected.are exment. These mechanisms allow decision makers pected to negatively affect both workload and SA to develop SA when they have only limited inforunless moderated by the presence of a mental mation from the environment. model for dealing with that complexity. ; 

- 4.A person’s expectations or preconceptions about 6. Automation of human decision making and active future events and environmental features, as gensystem control is hypothesized to negatively aferated from mental models, instructions, and comfect operator SA, leading to out-of-the-loop permunications, will influence the perception proformance problems. Automation of peripheral 

- 5. SAcessis and viewed the interpretationas being generatedof what fromis perceived.a combinativelytasks (e.g.,affectdataSA byintegration)reducing istheexpectedload on tolimitedposition of goal-directed (top-down) and data-directed working memory. (bottom-up) processing. As such, it will be af. . fected by both the operator’s current goals and Directions for Future Research the presence of salient environmental cues. . . 

- 6. The operator’s current goals will act to direct the The model presented provides an integrated selection of a mental model and the focus (or framework for conceptualizing the SA construct, 

- 7. frame)Knowledgetakenof oncritical the model.cues in the environment is.thus providing a common: ground: for movhighly important for (a) directing the selection of ing forward. As such, it provides several active goals from among possible operator goals _ capabilities. (and thus mental model selection) and (b) pattern SA requirements. The model can be used to matching with schemata of prototypical situa. - : tions according to the current model. generate a means of determining SA require- 

- 8. Automaticity is presented as an additional mech-__ ments (elements) for individual domains of inanism for overcoming attention and working terest. The criticality of operator goals in the SA memory limitations. When operating with auto. ; maticity, it is expected that operators will have Process dictates that SA requirements (at all levreduced awareness of environmental factors els) are dependent on the operator's goals in re(lower SA), particularly for those elements outjation to the system. Thus a goal-directed task side the automated sequence, and thus will . oo. " : be more likely to make errors under novel analysis methodology is indicated in which the circumstances. requirements for system data, the comprehen- 

- In addition, several characteristics of systems sion and integration of that data, and the Ppro- 

- and tasks are hypothesizedYP to influence an indiJjection of future states are determined for each vidual’s abilityy to achieve SA. of the operator’sPp majorJ goals and subgoals. 

| SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

March 1995—59 

A methodology for conducting this type of namics. SA-oriented training would focus on analysis has been developed and applied to airtraining operators to identify prototypical situto-air fighter aircraft (Endsley, 1993c),advanced ations of concern associated with these models bombers (Endsley, 1989a), and air traffic control _ by recognizing critical cues and what they mean (Endsley and Rodgers, 1994). In many domains, in terms of relevant goals. designers are working with only simple informaAs SA is not a passive process, the skills retion requirements, without determining how the quired for achieving and maintaining good SA information needs to be integrated to support need to be identified and formally taught in operator goals. This methodology can be applied _ training programs. Factors such as how to emto these domains to determine the SA requireploy a system to best achieve SA (when and ments for systems. where to look for what), appropriate scan patIndividual abilities. Endsley and Bolstad terns, or techniques for making the most of lim(1994) found evidence of fairly stable differences ited information need to be determined and exbetween individuals in their ability to achieve _ plicitly taught in the training process. This type SA given the same system. Based on the present of focus greatly supplements traditional techmodel, variations in SA abilities were hypothenology-oriented training that concentrates sized to arise from individual differences in (a) mainly on the mechanics of how a system spatial abilities; (b) attention sharing; (c) mem- __ operates. ory, including working memory capacity and In addition, the role of feedback in the learnlong-term memory stores; (d) perceptual skills, ing process may be exploited. It may be possible including perceptual speed, encoding speed, vigto provide feedback on the accuracy and comilance, and pattern-matching skills; and (e) pleteness of operator SA as a part of training higher-order cognitive skills, including analytic programs. This would allow operators to underskills, cognitive complexity, field independence, stand their mistakes and better assess and interand locus of control. Testing these hypotheseson pret the environment, leading to the developa group of experienced fighter pilots, Endsley ment of more effective sampling strategies and and Bolstad found strong evidence for the imbetter schemata for integrating information. portance of spatial skills and perceptual skills Training techniques such as these need to be exand partial support for the importance of attenplored and tested to determine methods for imtion-sharing and pattern-matching skills. proving SA with existing systems. More studies are needed to expand these findDesign. Several general hypotheses and recings to a larger, broader population. In addition, ommendations concerning how to design systhe degree to which such capabilities generalize tems to enhance SA were generated by the across different domains, indicating a general model. More research is needed to apply, test, SA skill or ability, needs to be determined. The and expand on these recommendations in relaidentification of basic human abilities that are _ tion to the design of specific systems in various important for SA may be useful for improving domains. Several factors need to be determined, operator SA through either selection or training. including ways to determine and effectively deTraining. Programs directed at improving op- _ liver critical cues; ways to ensure accurate exerator training by making it “SA oriented” can _pectations; methods for assisting operators in also be generated from the model. (See Endsley, deploying attention effectively; methods for pre1989b, for a detailed discussion.) They can be _ venting the disruption of attention, particularly developed to instruct operators to identify the under stress and heavy workload; and ways to important characteristics of mental models in develop systems that are compatible with operspecific domains, such as the components, dyator goals. namics and functioning of the components and Research is being conducted to investigate a projection of future actions based on these dyhost of new technologies and designs being 

60—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

considered for future systems, including threemore precise specification of mental models dimensional visual and auditory displays, voice have been expounded by Wilson and Rutherford control, expert systems, helmet-mounted dis(1989).Ifmental models are truly “mechanisms plays, and virtual reality. This model should be whereby humans are able to generate descripuseful for generating hypotheses concerning the _ tions of system purpose and form, explanations effect of new technologies on SAin the context of of system functioning and observed system a particular domain and system interface. states, and predictions of future systems states,” Through controlled testing and an objective deas described by Rouse and Morris (1985, p. 7), termination of the impact of these concepts on _ then three of the four criteria (system functionSA, specific design guidelines for their impleing, states, and predictions) can be determined mentation, alone and in conjunction with one by examining situation models (SA) across varanother, can be established. ious contexts or states of the model. This type of SA construct. Future research on the SA con-_ effort may help create a better understanding of struct is greatly needed. Several major hypoththe nature of mental models in specific domains. eses have been formulated concerning underlySA measurement. The ability to objectively ing information-processing mechanisms. The measure SA is seen as critical for future progress role of each of the major components needs tobe _ in this field. It provides a means of evaluating formally tested and explored. In addition, em- _ the efficacy of design concepts and technologies, pirical data are needed on SAasawholeinorder providing diagnostic data for design iteration, to better understand and validate the hypotheand a means of evaluating and developing trainsized interactions and integration of individual ing concepts. It also provides a means of refactors. SA has been presented as a three-level searching the SA construct, investigating the concept. The relative importance of these levels impact of various factors in SA, and explicitly needs to be established. How critical of a role testing the hypotheses concerning SA. Without does projection play, for instance? How is this capability, no real progress in the area of SA higher-level SA generated from lower-level design or theory can be made. Methodologies for data? Mental models and goals are hypothesized measuring SA are discussed in the subsequent here as critical mechanisms, but they need furpaper (Endsley, 1995, this issue), based on the ther exploration. model presented here. 

Research is also needed to better understand the processes operators use to achieve‘ SA. The Summary way in which information is acquired by indiA model of SA has been presented in relation viduals and teams needs to be determined toto decision making in complex systems. Buildidentify successful techniques for coping with ing on research in naturalistic decision making, complex, dynamic systems. Useful critical cues a person’s SA is viewed asaa critical focal point that may be vital to achieving good SA (or cues__ of the decision process. In this role, SA is prethat lead to poor SA via the representational ersented as a general construct, applicable across ror) need to be determined. The degree and a wide variety of environments environments and systems. nature of individual differences in such proSA is viewed as consisting of a person's state cesses are not widely known at this point,except of knowledge about a dynamic environment. It anecdotally. incorporates the perception of relevant ele- 

A model of SA has been presented in relation decision making in complex systems. Building on research in naturalistic decision making, a person’s SA is viewed asaa critical focal point of the decision process. In this role, SA is presented as a general construct, applicable across a wide variety of environments environments and systems. SA is viewed as consisting of a person's state of knowledge about a dynamic environment. It incorporates the perception of relevant elements, comprehension of the meaning of these elements in combination combination with and in relation to operator goals, and a projection of future states of the environment based on this understanding. Using this knowledge, individuals with good SA will have a greater likelihood of making 

In addition, the concept of SA may be useful in ments, comprehension researching other constructs. For instance, situelements in combination combination ation models (or SA), which are a virtual reflecoperator goals, and a tion of system models, may shed some light on _ the concept of a mental model. Problems with Using this knowledge, the nebulous use of the term and the need for SA will have a greater 

- SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY March 1995—61 appropriate decisions and performing well in diabolical. In L. P. Goodstein, H. B. Anderson, and S. E. d . By | . b SA Olsen (Eds.), Tasks, errors and mental models (pp. 240-250). ynamic systems. y learning more a out London: Taylor & Francis. 

- requirements and the SA construct as a whole, Carmody, M. A., and Gluckman, J. P. (1993). Task-specific efmore effective: interface: designs: and trainingcs fectsmance,of workloadautomationandandsituationalautomationawareness.failure onInperfor-R. S. programs can be established to support decision Jensen and D. Neumeister (Eds.), Proceedings of the Sev. . : enth International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 

- making in complex environments. 167-171). Columbus, OH: Ohio State University, Department of Aviation. 

- ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Casson, R. W. (1983). Schema in cognitive anthropology. Annual Review of Anthropology, 12, 429-462. 

- I would like to thank Chris Wickens, Mark Rodgers, Bob Cohen,M. S. (1993). Metacognitive strategies in support of rec- 

- Blanchard, and several anonymous reviewers for their helpful ognition. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergocomments on an earlier version of this paper. In addition, I'd nomics Society 37th Annual Meeting (pp. 1102-1106). Santa like to recognize the contributions of numerous individuals Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. who have provided stimulating dialogue on SA over many Damos, D., and Wickens, C. D. (1980). The acquisition and years, including Mark Chignell, Roy Cohen, Lee Fracker, Mike transfer of time-sharing skills. Acta Psychologica, 6, 569— Majors, and Bob Taylor, to name a few. . §77. REFERENCES Davis,Air D.Ministry. R. (1948). Pilot error. London: HMSO, Great Britain Davis, E. T., Kramer, P., and Graham, N. (1983). Uncertainty 

- Amalberti, R., and Deblon, F. (1992). Cognitive modeling of about spatial frequency, spatial position, or contrast of fighter aircraft process control: A step towards an intellivisual patterns. Perception and Psychophysics, 5, 341-346. gent on-board assistance system. International Journal of — deGroot, A. (1965). Thought and choice in chess. The Hague, Man-Machine Systems, 36, 639-671. Netherlands: Mouton. 

- Ashby, F. G., and Gott, R. E. (1988). Decision rules in the per- _ Dreyfus, S. E. (1981). Formal models vs. human situational unception and categorization of multidimensional stimuli. derstanding: Inherent limitations on the modeling of busiJournal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and ness expertise (ORC 81-3). Berkeley, CA: University of CalCognition, 14, 33-53. ifornia, Operations Research Center. 

- Bacon, S. J. (1974). Arousal and the range of cue utilization. | Endsley, M. R. (1987a). The application of human factors to Journal of Experimental Psychology, 102, 81-87. the development of expert systems for advanced cockpits. 

- Baddeley, A. D. (1972). Selective attention and performance in In Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 31st Annual dangerous environments. British Journal of Psychology, 63, Meeting (pp. 1388-1392). Santa Monica, CA: Human Fac537-546. tors and Ergonomics Society. 

- Barber, P.J., and Folkard, S. (1972). Reaction time under _ Endsley, M. R. (1987b). SAGAT: A methodology for the measurestimulus uncertainty with response certainty. Journal of ment of situation awareness (NOR DOC 87-83). Hawthorne, Experimental Psychology, 93, 138-142. CA: Northrop Corp. 

- Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimentaland __Endsley, M. R. (1988a). Design and evaluation for situation social psychology. London: Cambridge University Press. awareness enhancement. In Proceedings of the Human Fac- 

- Bartlett, F.C. (1943). Fatigue following highly skilled work. tors Society 32nd Annual Meeting (pp. 97-101). Santa Proceedings of the Royal Society (B), 131, 147-257. Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 

- Bettman, J. R., and Kakkar, P. (1977). Effects of information Endsley, M. R. (1988b). Situation Awareness Global Assesspresentation format on consumer information acquisition ment Technique (SAGAT). In Proceedings of the National strategies. Journal of Consumer Research, 3, 233-240. Aerospace and Electronics Conference (pp. 789-795). New 

- Biederman, I., Mezzanotte, R. J., Rabinowitz, J. C., Francolin, York: IEEE. C.M., and Plude, D. (1981). Detecting the unexpected in Endsley, M. R. (1989a). Final report: Situation awareness in an photo interpretation. Human Factors, 23, 153-163. advanced strategic mission (NOR DOC 89-32). Hawthorne, 

- Billings, C. E. (1991). Human-centered aircraft automation: A CA: Northrop Corp. concept and guidelines (NASA Technical Memorandum _ Endsley, M. R. (1989b). Pilot situation awareness: The chal103885). Moffet Field, CA: NASA-Ames Research Center. lenge for the training community. In Proceedings of the 

- Bowers, K. S. (1991). Knowing more than we can say leads to InterservicelIndustry Training Systems Conference (pp. 111saying more than we can know: On being implicitly in117). Ft Worth, TX: American Defense Preparedness Assoformed. In D. Magnusson (Ed.), Toward a psychology of ciation. situations: An interactional perspective (pp. 179-194). Hills| Endsley, M. R.(1990a, March). Objective evaluation ofsituation dale, NJ: Erlbaum. awareness for dynamic decision makers in teleoperations. 

- Braune, R.J., and Trollip, S. R. (1982). Towards an internal Presented at the Engineering Foundation Conference on model in pilot training. Aviation, Space and Environmental Human-Machine Interfaces for Teleoperators and Virtual Medicine, 53, 996-999. Environments, Santa Barbara, CA. 

- Broadbent, D. E. (1954). Some effects of noise on visual per_ Endsley, M. R. (1990b). Predictive utility of an objective meaformance. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 6, sure of situation awareness. In Proceedings of the Human 1-5. Factors Society 34th Annual Meeting (pp. 41-45). Santa 

- Broadbent, D.E. (1971). Decision and stress. London: AcaMonica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. demic. Endsley, M. R. (1990c). Situation awareness in dynamic human 

- Callaway, E., III, and Dembo, D. (1958). Narrowed attention: decision making: Theory and measurement. Unpublished A psychological phenomenon that accompanies a certain doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California, physiological change. AMA Archives ofNeurology and PsyLos Angeles, CA. chiatry, 79, 74-90. Endsley, M.R. (1993a). Situation awareness and workload: 

- Carmino, A., Idee, E., Larchier Boulanger, J., and Morlat, G. Flip sides of the same coin. In R. S. Jensen and D. Neu(1988). Representational errors: Why some may be termed meister (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventh International 

## 62—March 1995 HUMAN FACTORS 

- Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 906-911). Columstimulus dimensions. Perception and Psychophysics, 30, bus, OH: Ohio State University, Department of Aviation. 291-302. 

- Endsley, M. R. (1993b, February). Situation awareness in dyJacoby, L. L., and Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship benamic human decision making: Theory. Presented at the tween autobiographical memory and perceptual learning. First International Conference on Situational Awareness Journal ofExperimental Psychology: General, 110, 306-340. in Complex Systems, Orlando, FL. Janis, I. L. (1982). Decision making under stress. In L. Gold- 

- Endsley, M. R. (1993c). A survey of situation awareness reberger and S. Breznitz (Eds.), Handbook of stress: Theoretquirements in air-to-air combat fighters. International ical and clinical aspects (pp. 69-87). New York: Free Press. Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3, 157-168. Jerison, H. J. (1957). Performance on a simple vigilance task in 

- Endsley, M. R., and Bolstad, C. A. (1993). Human capabilities noise and quiet. Journal of the Acoustical Society of Amerand limitations in situation awareness. In Combat automaica, 29, 1163-1165. tion for airborne weapon systems: Manimachine interface Jerison, H. J. (1959). Effects of noise on human performance. trends and technologies (AGARD-CP-520; pp. 19/1-19/10). Journal ofApplied Psychology, 43, 96-101. Neuilly-Sur-Seine, France: NATO-Advisory Group for Jones, R. A. (1977). Self-fulfilling prophecies: Social, psychologAerospace Research and Development. ical and physiological effects of expectancies. Hillsdale, NJ: 

- Endsley, M.R., and Bolstad, C. A. (1994). Individual differErlbaum. oo ; ences in pilot situation awareness. International Journal of Judge, C. L. (1992). Situation awareness: modeling, measureAviation Psychology, 4, 241-264. ment, and impacts. In Proceedings of the Human Factors 

- Endsley, M. R., and Kiris, E. O. (in press). The out-of-the-loop Society 36th Annual Meeting (pp. 40-42). Santa Monica, performance problem and level of control in automation. CA: Human Factors an Ergonomics Society. sos Human Factors. Kaempf, G. L., Wolf, S., and Miller, T. E. (1993). Decision mak- 

- Bndtey(DOT/FAA/AM-94/27).M. fo and Rodgers,Washington, MD.OneDC: cagtionnasFederalawarenessAviation Aingi **n** gsnual ofin the theMeeting AEGIS Human(pp. combatFactors1107-1111). information and ErgonomicsSantacenter.Monica,Society In Proceed-CA: 37thHuAdministration, ' Office of Aviation Medicine . man Factors and Ergonomics Society. . 

- Eysenck, M. W. (1982). Attention and arousal: Cognition. and Kahneman,NJ: Prentice-Hall.D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, performance. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. Kaplan, C.A., and Simon, H. A. (1990). In search of insight. 

- Federal Aviation Administration. (1990). The national plan for Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374-419. aviation human factors. Washington, DC: U.S. Department —_Keinan, G. (1987). Decision making under stress: Scanning of Transportation. of alternatives under controllable and uncontrollable 

- Fischer, U., Orasanu, J., and Montalvo, M. (1993). Efficient threats. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, decision strategies on the flight deck. In Proceedings of the 639-644, Seventh International Symposium on Aviation Psychology Keinan, G., and Friedland, N. (1987). Decision making under (pp. 238-243). Columbus, OH: Ohio State University. stress: Scanning of alternatives under physical threat. Acta 

- Fracker, M. L. (1987). Situation awareness: A decision model. Psychologica, 64, 219-228. Unpublished manuscript. Dayton, OH. Kellog, R. T. (1980). Is conscious attention necessary for long- 

- Fracker, M. L. (1988). A theory of situation assessment: Impliterm storage? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human cations for measuring situation awareness. In Proceedings Learning and Memory, 6, 379-390. of the Human Factors Society 32nd Annual Meeting (pp. Klein, G. A. (1989a). Do decision biases explain too much? 102-106). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and ErgoHuman Factors Society Bulletin, 32(5), 1-3. nomics Society. Klein, G. A. (1989b). Recognition-primed decisions. In W. B. 

- Fracker, M. L. (1989). Attention gradients in situation awareRouse (Ed.), Advances in man-machine systems research ness. In Situational awareness in aerospace operations (pp. 47-92). Greenwich, CT: JAI. . rs -_ (AGARD-CP-478; pp. 6/1~6/10). Neuilly-Sur-Seine, France: Klein, G. A. (1993). Sources of error in naturalistic decisionNATO-Advisory. Group for Aerospace Research and DevelErnonee In Ht[oceedings][of] in[Ht] ine (p F168 Tt) 

- Haneman,E., and R.Midkiff, J., Wanke,A. (1992, C., Kuchar,September). J., Mykityshyn,Hazard alerting M., Hahn,and oaaes Monica,ics Socie CA: Human Factorsnnual . andMeeting Ergonomics. (pp. Soci-. situational awareness in advanced air transport cockpits. Klein, G. A., Calderwood, R., and Clinton-Cirocco, A. (1986). Presented at the 18th ICAS Congress, Beijing, China. Rapid decision making on the fire ground. In Proceedings 

- Herstein,cognitive; J.A. (1981). Keeping. the voter’sSerbanlimit in mind:aon A of576-580).the HumanSantaFactorsMonica,SocietyCA: Human30th AnnualFactorsMeetingand Ergo-(pp. processing analysis of decision making in voting. nomics Society ao 8 

- . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40, 843-861. Kuhn, T. (1970). The structure ofscientific revolutions (2nd ed.). 

- Hinsley, D., Hayes, J. R., and Simon, H. A. (1977). From words Chicago: University of Chicago Press. to equations. In P. Carpenter and M. Just (Eds.), Cognitive Kuipers, A., Kappers, A., van Holten, C.R., van Bergen, Processes in comprehension. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. J.H. W., and Oosterveld, W. J. (1989). Spatial disorienta- 

- Hockey, G. R. J. (1970). Effect of loud noise on attentional setion incidents in the R.N.L.A.F. F16 and F5 aircraft and lectivity. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 22, suggestions for prevention. In Situational Awareness in 28-36. Aerospace Operations (AGARD-CP-478, pp. OV-E-1-OV-E- 

- Hockey,functionG. R.J. (1986). Changes in operator efficiency as a 16). Copenhagen, Denmark: NATO-Advisory Group for rhythms. of environmental stress, fatigue and circadian Aerospace Research and Development. HandbookIn K. Boff, L. Kaufman, and J. Thomas (Eds.), _ Lipshitz, R. (1987). Decision making in the real world: Develop44/49). ofperception and human performance (pp. 44/1— ing descriptions and prescriptions from decision maker's ret- 

- Holland, New York: Wiley. rospective accounts. Boston: Boston University Center for P. J. H., Holyoak, K.F., Nisbett, R.E., and Thagard, Applied Sciences. R. (1986). Induction: Processes of inference, learning and Logan, G. D. (1988). Automaticity, resources, and memory: 

- discovery. Cambridge: MIT Press. Theoretical controversies and practical implications. Hu- 

- Humphreys, G. W. (1981). Flexibility of attention between man Factors, 30, 583-598. 

## SITUATION AWARENESS THEORY 

## March 1995—63 

- MacMillian, J., Entin, E. B., and Serfaty, D. (1993). Evaluating machine interaction (pp. 10-14). La Jolla, CA: University of expertise in a complex domain—Measures based on theCalifornia, San Diego. ory. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics _ Orasanu, J., Dismukes, R. K., and Fischer, U. (1993). Decision Society 37th Annual Meeting (pp. 1152-1155). Santa errors in the cockpit. In Proceedings of the Human Factors Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. and Ergonomics Society 37th Annual Meeting (pp. 363-367). 

- Mandler, G. (1982). Stress and thought processes. In L. GoldSanta Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Sociberger and S. Breznitz (Eds.), Handbook of stress: Theoretety. ical and clinical aspects (pp. 88-104). New York: Free Press. Palmer, S. E. (1975). The effects of contextual scenes on the 

- Manktelow, K., and Jones, J. (1987). Principles from the psyidentification of objects. Memory and Cognition, 3, 519chology of thinking and mental models. In M. M. Gardiner 526. and B. Christie (Eds.), Applying cognitive psychology to _ Posner, M.I., Nissen, J. M., and Klein, R. (1976). Visual domuser-interface design (pp. 83-117). Chichester, England: inance: An information processing account of its origin Wiley. and significance. Psychological Review, 83, 157-171. 

- Martin, M., and Jones, G. V. (1984). Cognitive failures in evPosner, M. I., Nissen, J. M., and Ogden, W. C. (1978). Attended eryday life. In J. E. Harris and P. E. Morris (Eds.), Everyday and unattended processing modes: The role of set for spamemory, actions and absent-mindedness (pp. 173-190). Lontial location. In H. L. Pick and E. J. Saltzman (Eds.), Modes don: Academic. of perceiving and processing (pp. 137-157). Hillsdale, NJ: 

- Mayer, R. E. (1983). Thinking, problem solving, cognition. New Erlbaum. York: Freeman. Press, M. (1986). Situation awareness: Let's get serious about the 

- McCarthy, G. W. (1988). Human factors in F16 mishaps. Flying clue-bird. Unpublished manuscript. Safety, May, 17-21. Rasmussen, J. (1986). Information processing and human- 

- Meister, D. (1971). Human factors: Theory and practice. New machine interaction: An approach to cognitive engineering. York: Wiley. New York: North-Holland. 

- Ministry of Planning, Housing, Transport, and Maritime Af- | Rasmussen, J., and Rouse, W. B. (Eds.). (1981). Human detecfairs. (1989). Investigation commission final report concerntion and diagnosis of system failures. New York: Plenum. ing the accident which occurred on June 26th, 1988, at Mul- _ Reason, J. (1984). Absent-mindedness and cognitive control. In house-Habscheim (68) to the Airbus A320, registered J. E. Harris and P. E. Morris (Eds.), Everyday memory, acF-GFKC. Paris: Author. tion and absent-mindedness (pp. 111-132). London: Aca- 

- Mintzburg, H. (1973). The nature of managerial work. New demic. York: Harper and Row. Reason, J. (1987). A framework for classifying errors. In J. 

- Moray, N. (1986). Monitoring behavior and supervisory conRasmussen, K. Duncan, and J. Leplat (Eds.), New technoltrol. In K. Boff, L. Kaufman, and J. Thomas (Eds.), Handogies and human error (pp. 5-14). Chichester, England: book ofperception and human performance (pp. 40/1-40/51).perception and human performance (pp. 40/1-40/51). and human performance (pp. 40/1-40/51). human performance (pp. 40/1-40/51). performance (pp. 40/1-40/51). (pp. 40/1-40/51). 40/1-40/51). Wiley. 

- Moray, N. (1986). Monitoring behavior and supervisory control. In K. Boff, L. Kaufman, and J. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook ofperception and human performance (pp. 40/1-40/51).perception and human performance (pp. 40/1-40/51). and human performance (pp. 40/1-40/51). human performance (pp. 40/1-40/51). performance (pp. 40/1-40/51). (pp. 40/1-40/51). 40/1-40/51). New York: Wiley. 

   - Roschelle, J., and Greeno, J. G. (1987). Mental models in expert physics reasoning (DTIC AD-A184106). Berkeley, CA: University of California. California. 

- Mosier, K.L., and Chidester, T. R. (1991). Situation assessphysics reasoning (DTIC AD-A184106). Berkeley, CA: Uniment and situation awareness in a team setting. In Y. versity of California. California. Queinnec and F. Daniellou (Eds.), Designing for everyone Rouse, W.B., and Morris, N. M. (1985). On looking into the (pp. 798-800). London: Taylor & Francis. black box: Prospects and limits box: Prospects and limits and limits limits in the search search for mental mod- mental mod- mod- 

- National Transportation Safety Board. (1973). Aircraft acciels (DTIC AD-A159080). Atlanta, GA: Georgia Institute of dent report: Eastern Airlines 401/L-1011, Miami, Florida, DeTechnology, Center for Man-Machine Systems Research. cember 29, 1972 (NTSB/AAR-73-14). Washington, DC: Au_—_ Sarter, Sarter, N. B., and Woods, and Woods, Woods, D. D. (1991). Situation awareness: awareness: A thor. critical but ill-defined phenomenon. International Journal Journal 

- National Transportation Safety Board. (1979). Aircraft acciof Aviation Psychology, 1, 45-57. dent report: United Airlines, Inc., McDonnell-Douglas DC-8- — Schank, R. C., and Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals 61, N8082U, Portland, Oregon, December 28, 1978 (NTSB/ and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. AAR-79-07). Washington, DC: Author. Sharit, J., and Salvendy, G. (1982). Occupational stress: Re- 

   - Rouse, W.B., and Morris, N. M. (1985). On looking into the black box: Prospects and limits box: Prospects and limits and limits limits in the search search for mental mod- mental mod- models (DTIC AD-A159080). Atlanta, GA: Georgia Institute of Technology, Center for Man-Machine Systems Research. 

   - _—_ Sarter, Sarter, N. B., and Woods, and Woods, Woods, D. D. (1991). Situation awareness: awareness: A critical but ill-defined phenomenon. International Journal Journal of Aviation Psychology, 1, 45-57. 

   - Sharit, J., and Salvendy, G. (1982). Occupational stress: Review and reappraisal. Human Factors, 24, 129-162. 

- National Transportation Safety Board. (1981). Aircraft separation incidents at Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia (NTSB/SIR-81-6). Washington, DC: Author. 

- National Transportation Safety Board. (1988). Aircraft accident report: Northwest Airlines, Inc., McDonnell-Douglas DC-9-82, N312RC, Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport, August 16, 1987 (NTSB/AAR-99-05). Washington, DC: Author. 

- National Transportation Safety Board. (1990). Aircraft accident report: US Air Flight 105, Boeing 737-200, N282AU, Kansas International Airport, Missouri, September 8, 1989 (NTSB/AAR-90-04). Washington, DC: Author. 

- Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton- 

   - Sheridan, T. (1981). Understanding human error and aiding human diagnostic behavior in nuclear power plants. In J. Rasmussen and W. B. Rouse (Eds.), Human detection and diagnosis ofsystem failures (pp. 19-35). New York: Plenum. 

   - Simmel, E.C., and Shelton, R. (1987). An assessment of nonroutine situations by pilots: A two-part process. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, 58, 1119-1121. 

   - | Sundstrom, G. A. (1987). Information search and decision making: The effects of information displays. Acta Psychologica, 65, 165-179. 

   - Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning. Cognitive Science, 12, 257-285. 

- Century, Crofts. 

   - Taylor, R. M. (1989). Situational awareness rating technique (SART): The development of a tool for aircrew systems design. In Situational Awareness in Aerospace Operations (AGARD-CP-478 pp. 3/1-3/17). Copenhagen, Denmark: NATO-Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development. 

- Nisbett, R. E., and Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review, 84, 231-259. 

- Noble, D., Boehm-Davis, D., and Grosz, C. (1987). Rules, schema and decision making (NR 649-005). Vienna, VA: Engineering Research Associates. 

   - Treisman, A., and Paterson, R. (1984). Emergent features, attention and object perception. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10, 12-31. 

   - Tulving, E. (1985). How many memory systems are there? American Psychologist, 40, 385-398. 

- Norman, D. A. (1976). Memory and attention. New York: Wiley. 

- | Norman, D. A. (1983). A psychologist views human processing: Human errors and other phenomena suggest processing mechanisms. In D. A. Norman (Ed.), Five papers on human- 

## 64—March 1995 

## HUMAN FACTORS 

- Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453-458. 

- US. Air Force 57th Fighter Wing. (1986). Intraflight command, control, and communications symposium final report. Nellis Air Force Base, NV: Author. 

      - ing MIDIS, a microcomputer-based simulation. In Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 32nd Annual Meeting (pp. 173-177). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 

   - Wiener, E. L. (1993). Life in the second decade of the glass cockpit. In R. S. Jensen and D. Neumeister (Eds.), In Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 1-11). Columbus, OH: Ohio State University, Department of Aviation. 

- VanDijk, T. A., and Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse comprehension. New York: Academic. 

- Venturino, M., Hamilton, W. L., and Dvorchak, S. R. (1989). Performance-based measures of merit for tactical situation awareness. In Situation Awareness in Aerospace Operations (AGARD-CP-478 pp. 4/1-4/5). Copenhagen, Denmark: NATO-Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development. 

- Wachtel, P. L. (1967). Conceptions of broad and narrow attention. Psychological Bulletin, 68, 417-429. 

   - Wiener, E. L., and Curry, R. E. (1980). Flight deck automation: Promises and problems. Ergonomics, 23, 995-1011. 

   - Wilson, J. R., and Rutherford, A. (1989). Mental models: Theory and application in human factors. Human Factors, 31, 617-634. 

   - Wirstad, J. (1988). On knowledge structures for process operators. In L. P. Goodstein, H. B. Anderson, and S. E. Olsen (Eds.), Tasks, errors, and mental models (pp. 50-69). Lon- 

- Weltman, G., Smith, J. E., and Egstrom, G. H. (1971). Perceptual narrowing during simulated pressure-chamber exposure. Human Factors, 13, 99-107. 

- Wickens, C. D. (1984). Engineering psychology and human performance (Ast ed.). Columbus, OH: Merrill. 

- Wickens, C. D. (1992a). Engineering psychology and human performance (2nd ed.). New York: HarperCollins. 

      - don: Taylor & Francis. 

   - | Woodhead, M. M. (1964). The effects of bursts of noise on an arithmetic task. American Journal of Psychology, 77, 627633. 

   - Wright, P. (1974). The harassed decision maker: Time pressures, distractions, and the use of evidence. Journal of Applied Psychology, 59, 555-561. 

- Wickens, C. D. (1992b). Workload and situation awareness: An sures, distractions, and the use analogy of history and implications. Insight: The Visual plied Psychology, 59, 555-561. Performance Technical Group Newsletter, 14(4), 1-3. . 

- Wickens, C. D., Stokes, A. F., Barnett, B., and Hyman, F. Date received: January 26, 1993 (1988). Stress and pilot judgment: An empirical study us| Date accepted: March 2, 1994 

